---
title: "Spatial Genealogies:"
weight: 2
subtitle: Mobility, Settlement, and Empire-Building in the Brazilian Backlands, 1650-1800
doi: https://doi.org/10.31835/ma.2021.02
draft: false
author: 
- name: Leonardo Barleta
  affiliation: Stanford University
  email: lbarleta@stanford.edu
citation:
- author: "Barleta, Leonardo"
  title: "Spatial Genealogoies: Mobility, Settlement, and Empire-Building in the Brazilian Backlands, 1650-1800"
  journal: Journal of Social History
  year: 2021
  volume: 54
  issue: 4
  pages:
  doi: https://doi.org/10.1093/jsh/shab006
---

{{% notation title="Headnote" %}}

This article is a part of a broader research project that examines the
interiorization of the Portuguese colonization in Brazil during the
seventeenth and eighteenth centuries. This process is usually studied
from a regional perspective, in which scholars discuss how mobility and
frontier resources shaped local communities, or through ideas of
discovery, exploration, and pioneering that emphasize the agency of
particular individuals or specific events. Both interpretations,
however, didn't account for a defining characteristic of this process
that intrigued me: the resulting spatial distribution of settlements was
highly dispersed and discontinuous. This fact raises a series of
questions (some of them very naive) that go unanswered in the
historiography. (For example, how, in remote mining camps and nascent
settlements, did a person acquire goods that were not produced locally?
Was the mere existence of gold enough to explain the entire process?
Also, given the limited geographic knowledge and absence of maps and
regular infrastructure, how did a person get there in the first place?)
My research shifted the discussion to what were the mechanisms that
linked and allowed exchanges between distant settlements and how they
were integrated into the Portuguese empire.

Besides leaving these questions open, scholars that studied this process
also used (in very different ways) extensively genealogical writings,
particularly those that focused on colonial São Paulo. In this region,
recordings of family lineages have been part of the historiographical
tradition since the eighteenth century. Since then, three major
compilations, which list the names, family relationships, and other
information of thousands of Luso-Brazilians colonists that lived in São
Paulo, were published and are still used by historians. Although many
records contain evidence of the spatial practice of these historical
actors, they are mainly used in an anecdotal fashion. In contrast,
digital methods enabled me to revisit these well-known materials and
look for broader patterns that only intuitively gathered in close
reading.

{{% /notation %}}

On April 22, 1715, the marriage of Maria de Arruda Leite and João
Antunes Maciel was listed laconically in the parish books of Itu, a
small town in a frontier zone of colonial Brazil. The recording of the
wedding took just a few lines, using a customary template to state the
couple's and parents' names and declare the administration of the holy
sacrament of matrimony.[^1] This formulaic act, repeated thousands of
times by priests in the Portuguese empire, reveals a sense of
ordinariness that permeated the union. The couple was born into
distinguished families that settled in the region during the 17^th^
century, engaging in the exploration of frontier resources. Bride and
groom grew up in the same nearby town and, coincidentally, moved with
their families to Itu a few years before the wedding. Most likely, they
knew each other quite well and the union was a much-awaited event in the
community.

The ceremony thus seemed an ordinary happening in the town -- to the
point that the groom's absence could pass unnoticed to the modern
observer. On that day, João entered into wedlock by a proxy appointed to
act in his interest while he journeyed the backlands of South America.
Canon law and ecclesiastical regulations provided for the administration
of a sacrament in absentia, but this was reserved for extraordinary
occasions and required the approval of an archbishop, who lived more
than a thousand miles away. The lack of any indication in the marital
record makes it unlikely that the couple had an authorization of this
sort, yet the union was celebrated normally and confirmed by the birth
of three daughters in the following years.

Life stories like this, in which mobility and absence were everyday
imperatives, were not uncommon in the fringe of the Portuguese empire.
Itu was one of the few towns that the Luso-Brazilian settlers
established away from the coast before the 18^th^ century, in a small
cluster of inland settlements around São Paulo.[^2] This geographic
setting deviated from a long-standing pattern of Portuguese
empire-building. Since the 15^th^ century, settlements established
overseas were confined to the littoral and integrated into the empire
through maritime routes.[^3] The one-hundred miles that separated Itu
from the nearest port was not overwhelming, but the orientation of these
settlements, contrary to the rest of the overseas domains, was towards
the vast interior of South America.

Historians associated the geographic mobility of Luso-Brazilians
colonists with the frantic rush prompted by the discovery of gold at the
turn of the 18^th^ century or as part of the social dynamics of frontier
societies. Taking the viewpoint of state actors, to whom mobility was a
form of transgression and fiscally damaging, the first group of scholars
described itinerant lifestyles as marked by precariousness, marginality,
and poverty.[^4] The large contingent of colonists lured into the
backlands composed a picture of chaotic settlement that favored tax
evasion, contraband, and social laxness.[^5] Other scholars, especially
those focusing on colonial São Paulo, argued that mobility was a central
feature of those communities in the fringes of the empire. Driven by
opportunism or lack of alternatives, colonists relied on resources they
could exploit in the backlands, such as Indian slaves and land, to
survive away imperial centers.[^6]

This article connects these strands of historiography by analyzing the
spatial practices of the inhabitants of São Paulo during the
interiorization of the Portuguese colonization in Brazil. Based on
patterns of geographic mobility reconstituted through digital methods, I
argue that these colonists' sustained mobility wove together an
otherwise fragmented territory. In faraway regions where infrastructure
was lacking and the crown's grasp was weak, the comings and goings of
people like João and Maria linked settlements and afforded long-distance
social and economic exchanges. On the one hand, these patterns were less
disorderly as previously depicted as family relationships structured the
way people journeyed and settled inland -- people moved to places
associated with their kinsfolk, and families maintained long-term
ventures in the same locations for generations. On the other, the
consequences of these practices, deeply rooted in the mechanism of
social reproduction in the frontier, far exceeded the boundaries of
these communities. They not only defined social structure locally, as
posited by the second group of historians, but also shaped the geography
of the empire in the backlands. This mode of kin-based mobility allowed
the occupation of these remote areas and provided a way of remaining
connected to the rest of the empire.

By centering on the spatial practices of the inhabitants of São Paulo, I
challenge narratives that ascribed territorial formation to the actions
of state agents or the exceptionality of exploration or social
exclusion. Instead, this concept urges a shift in the focus to everyday
acts and routines that acquired meaning in space.[^7] The routinization
of mobility in the interior changed the role of the backlands in the
imperial geography. In colonial Brazil, as well as in other parts of the
empire, the term *sertão* -- here translated as "backlands" -- came to
signify the opposite of colonization and designated areas beyond the
control of the king of Portugal.[^8] For the inhabitants of São Paulo,
on the contrary, the backlands were not an undistinguished interior but
a set of specific locations associated with their family's trajectories.
As their settlements relied on frontier resources, they develop a series
of practices that made that environment amenable for exploitation. They
partnered with relatives to outfit slave raids or search for minerals,
cultivated land plots far away from settlements, forged regional
alliances through marital unions, and conducted their lives in several
places at once. These colonists also learned techniques of movement and
grew accustomed to the isolation of the backlands. In all, as expressed
in the story of João and Maria, mobility and absence became ordinary
aspects of their lives.

With the discovery of gold deposits in central Brazil at the turn of the
18^th^ century, these colonists repurposed their spatial practices for
the occupation of the backlands. Nevertheless, the vastness of the
territory contrasted with the small pockets of Luso-Brazilian
settlements that dotted the interior. Their capacity to move and remain
connected was instrumental to the survival and integration of these new
areas of occupation. Notably, the repetition of the journeys between the
same locations over time reinforced the ties that bound together distant
places, favoring the circulation of information, people, and goods and
granting a dispersed geography a sense of cohesion and integration.
Kinship-based mobility offered a mechanism to occupy large stretches of
dispersed land in a territorial configuration, though inland, remained
rather insular. In this sense, the spatial practices developed in the
17^th^ century were extended to a larger geographic scale during the
first decades of the following century, creating an intangible
infrastructure that impersonated the spatial configuration of the
Portuguese empire in the backlands.

{{% notation title="Digital Methods" %}}

This article relies heavily on what has been generically described as
"digital methods." Although the term itself isn't very descriptive, it
serves to indicate that the central evidence supporting this study was
systematically produced, analyzed, and represented using computational
tools. The research was a multi-step process and required a combination
of different tools and techniques. In the process of creating the
dataset, I used optical character recognition (OCR) to generate raw
data, custom-written Python code to parse and extract information, a
front-end web interface for manual revision, and a relational database
(MySQL) to organize and store the data. The database format allowed
different types of queries, from browsing records of the family of an
individual to quantitative analysis. Lastly, GIS mapping was also
crucial to analyze and create visualizations that support the argument
of the paper.

The term "digital methods" covers all these different steps, the
combination of which was the most time-consuming part of the project.
Individually, however, each of these parts---except for GIS
mapping---was a common way of handling data. (There are some noteworthy
insights, though. For example, the computational techniques I used
allowed me to "read" a book differently, such as connecting parts of the
genealogies that were scattered across the different volumes of the
book.) In this sense, they don't constitute a standalone method.
Moreover, their reproducibility is also questionable. While genealogical
data is widely available for many places and periods, I used a very
specific set of materials that was intimately associated with the
research question I was investigating. A detailed account of the process
of creating the dataset, which is common in digital humanities articles,
thus seemed less important than focus on the historiographical
contribution I intended to make.

Therefore, I decided to write this text as a regular historiographical
essay and include methodological information sparingly. My rule of thumb
was to have the minimal amount of methodological discussion to make my
evidence understandable and support my claims. I attempted to inform the
reader very briefly about the data I presented and how I was
interpreting it. In this sense, the digital methods that I used lie in
the background of the text. One of the consequences of this was that
hard-to-produce data might seem deceptively trivial in some cases. When
I make a statement like "X descendants of an explorer ended up settling
in the place he discovered," the amount of work and tinkering to produce
that small bit of information is obscured. Often, it required a lot of
fiddling with the dataset to find the best records to make a point.

However, the hardest part to communicate is how the practice of making
digital history deeply informed the understanding of the research object
and shaped the argument of the article. Building this dataset was a way
of thinking through the source materials. This process not only produced
analyzable data but also offered an environment and tools to "play" with
it. It was like taking apart and rebuilding, in a novel and purposeful
way, a toy: by disassembling these texts and reassembling them
digitally, I transformed my understanding of its content and structure.
For example, the idea of a pattern of multi-generational circular
mobility---"returnees" moving to places where previous generations of
the family were settled---came after revising dozens of records in which
siblings married in their parent's hometown. It wasn't a prior
hypothesis tested through quantification, but an argument developed
through the painstaking work of handling the dataset. They were the
results of the *experience* of working with genealogical writings
through various digital methods.

{{% /notation %}}

This article is the result of a novel way of reading traditional sources
using digital methods. For generations, genealogists have recorded
information about the lives of the inhabitants of São Paulo. Most of the
writings were sparse, usually focusing on the genealogists' family
history, but three comprehensive efforts to record the lineages of São
Paulo have been published in the past two centuries.[^9] These writings
weave together individual vignettes -- in most cases, just a few lines
containing the known dates and places of birth, marriage, and death --
within the set of familial relationships. Assisted by digital methods, I
analyzed these records collectively to delineate intertwined patterns of
geographic mobility and kinship formation and understand the meaning and
motivations underlying these spatial practices.[^10]

{{% notation title="About Sources" %}}

Genealogical compilations about the lineages of Luso-Brazilian colonists
in São Paulo have existed since the late eighteenth century when Pedro
Taques de Almeida Paes Leme---whose short biography appears towards the
end of the article---began to gather information about his fellow
countrypeople. Since then, several genealogists revised, corrected, and
expanded his early writings, publishing new versions of the compilation.
In 2002, genealogist Marta Amato revised and re-published the most
important of these compilations (the *Genealogia Paulistana*), which is
the basis for this study.

This edition includes more than 70,000 individual entries arranged in a
descending numbering system that replicates family relationships,
starting from a progenitor (an "original" settler). I identified 28,849
entries that were relative to people living during the colonial era,
which represents a sizeable share of the total population. For example,
in 1687, while ecclesiastical authorities counted 15,400 parishioners
about twelve years old in the captaincy of São Paulo, the dataset
included 2,848 individuals (18.5%). Gender distribution, based on first
names, slightly favors women (1:0.97 female-to-male ratio), but their
records were shorter than their men's. We can also assume that, due to
the nature of the genealogical enterprise, the top sector of São Paulo
society is overrepresented in the dataset.

Although the dataset is relatively large, it is very sparse and
fragmentary as most records had very little information. However,
because datapoints are linked through family relationships, I could
augment and enhance it in two ways. First, I used siblings' data to
identify the period in which a person lived (based on large temporal
units of 50 years,) which made useable many records that didn't include
dates. Second, I also connected families that, because of the linear
structure of the text, were in different parts of the text. (For
instance, family A has a record of X marrying Y, and family B has
another one of Y marrying X.) This procedure allowed me to observe the
importance of in-laws, as already pointed out by the historiography, in
the marriage strategies of this population.

From the subset of colonial-era individuals, I located 2,948 records
that listed places of birth and marriage. Inspired by origin-destination
analysis, which infers geographic mobility based on origin and endpoints
of a journey, I used these datapoints to trace the spatial practices of
these colonists. Figures 3 to 5 summarize the results. In addition,
other selections of the dataset, including places of death, complemented
the study.

{{% /notation %}}

This material became a relational database containing around 30,000
entries about individuals who lived in São Paulo or its area of
expansion between the 16^th^ and 18^th^ centuries. The textual records
were parsed to extract information about the individuals' lives while
the textual structure of the genealogies, which reproduced family
relationships, was preserved in the digital medium. The transformation
of these writings into networked data removed the linearity imposed by
the text, allowing the recombination of the web of family ties.
Individual stories of wayfaring and mobility were read alongside those
of siblings, cousins, in-laws, and other relatives that helped define
where people ended up settling and carrying on with their lives.
Moreover, linked data also helped to mitigate the constraints of an
extraordinarily fragmentary and incomplete corpus. From the universe of
individuals included in the genealogies, I identified more than 3,000
people with multiples mentions of being in a particular place, from
which I based most of my analysis.

{{% notation title="The simple map" %}}

Feedback I frequently received in writing this article, including from
one of the reviewers, was to include a "simple map" giving an overview
of the studied areas and showing the places I mentioned in the text. As
it is a common practice among historians, especially those that don't
focus on "central" places -- nobody asks for a map to show where Paris
is -- the absence of such a map causes discomfort and disorientation
among the readers.

Not having this simple map was an intentional choice for several
reasons. My work attempts to understand how space is historically
produced and, thus, liable to changes over time and explainable through
temporal analysis. Giving a static representation of this space,
especially when the article covers a long period, would contradict this
conceptual framework. It would also mislead the reader to believe that a
well-ordered space actually existed. The choice not to include such a
map is also supported by debates on information design and among
historians who use visualizations, which assert that visualization
should further arguments. That is, visualizations articulate a set of
evidence to demonstrate something to the reader. A "simple map" -- which
would offer a stagnant depiction of colonial Brazil -- would undermine
the article's argument.

The use of a basic map also raises issues specific to my research.
First, it would ascribe a top-down, grided territoriality that was alien
to the historical agents discussed in the article. A seventeenth-century
Luso-Brazilian colonist had a very different perception of space than
the aerial view of a modern map. Second, that map would emphasize the
linear distance between settlements as a central explanatory variable.
Indeed, distance, especially when measured using contemporary standards
(such as day's travel instead of miles), are an essential piece of any
analysis that centers on space. However, the underlying argument of the
paper is that for the mobility of the inhabitants of São Paulo, the
distance or availability of infrastructure mattered less than the social
relation and kinship networks established across locations.

Still, the discomfort caused by this absence remains, and I took two
measures to mitigate the disorientation of the readers. First, I tried
to distill the information that would exist in the basic map into the
existing visualizations. Second, in the revised version, I opted to
openly confront this problem. I make explicit the choice of not having
the map and use that as an opportunity to discuss the theoretical
underpinnings of my work and how they manifest in the structure and
choices of the article.

{{% /notation %}}

This approach allowed observing broad patterns of mobility, recombining
the data in multiple ways, and delving into specific exemplary cases.
Furthermore, visualizations, particularly maps, were key in this
investigation. They not only summarize selections of data but
graphically represent the argument put forth in the article.[^11] The
maps I present here are not merely devices for spatial orientation, such
as traditional "base maps" that preface books and articles of this sort.
Instead, I purposely avoided a base map to "show where things are." They
flatten the agents' historical experience by imposing an aerial,
omniscient view of space and contradict the main tenet of the article --
that space is produced historically. Instead, I opted to produce
visualizations only with data for the period in question, incorporating
relevant information for orientation in the existing maps.

# A Society on the Move

By the time of its foundation in the mid-16^th^ century, São Paulo was
the only Portuguese town in the Americas away from the Atlantic Ocean,
contrasting with a century-old pattern of empire-building. For most of
the early modern era, the Portuguese presence overseas was limited to
coastal settlements spread across the globe but connected to the
empire's center, Lisbon, through maritime routes.[^12] In South America,
the physical and human geography encouraged a sharp separation between
coast and backlands. The Serra do Mar, a system of mountains that
stretches for more than 1,000 miles along the coast between latitudes
20^o^ and 26^o^ S, hindered the access to the interior with peaks that
could reach 7,000 feet and were covered by lush tropical rainforest. At
the same time, they delineated a long but thin strip of land easily
accessible to colonists.[^13] This dichotomy also marked European
perceptions of the human geography. While the Portuguese mostly
encountered a relatively homogenous linguistic group, the Tupi, along
the coast, the interior was populated by the "ferocious" Tapuia -- a
generic designation for non-Tupi people.[^14]

Initially, the empire's extent in South America barely stretched a few
miles away from the sea. In the words of friar Vicente de Salvador, the
Portuguese, "although great conquerors of lands, do not take advantage
of them but are content to move along the seacoast scratching at them
like crabs."[^15] The foundation of São Paulo, an inland a dozen miles
to the west of the Serra do Mar, deviated from this mode of spatial
organization. It was located two or three days away from the nearest
port through a steep and poorly maintained trail -- a "tyrannical
march," as described in the 18^th^ century.[^16] The settlement began as
a Jesuit venture to assemble and convert Indians, but soon after its
creation, it received a contingent of Luso-Brazilian colonists and their
Indian allies. Over the next two centuries, São Paulo became a thriving
regional center.

{{% notation title="Figure 1" %}}

This visualization gives a brief overview of the process of territorial
expansion of the Portuguese colonization in Brazil. Because I used a
comprehensive dataset of towns and cities, it included many places that
weren't part of my narrative. They could mislead the reader, though. For
example, what appears to be the most dynamic area of expansion -- the
string-like network of new towns along the Amazon river in the second
half of the 18^th^ century -- isn't centrally related to the process I'm
describing. (For an excellent analysis of this subject, see Heather
Roller's *Amazonian Routes*.) Instead of arbitrarily selecting points
that would demonstrate my argument, I indicate in the captions those
aspects I wanted to emphasize in the visualizations and then discuss
them in the text. This is becoming standard practice in DH articles,
although many readers still just skim through the images and captions.

{{% /notation %}}

{{< figure src="/img/image1.png" title="Figure 1." alt="Locations of Portuguese towns and cities in South America, 1600-1800" caption=" Location of Portuguese towns (vilas) and cities (cidades) in South America. Several smaller settlements (mining camps, parishes, chapels, ranches, outposts, mining fields, etc.) existed alongside these cities and towns and, very often, several miles away from any major settlement. Data from Tiago Gil et al. “Vilas e Cidades” Atlas Digital da América Portuguesa. Brasilia: LHS/UnB, 2017. http://lhs.unb.br/atlas. Accessed January 4, 2019." >}}


The location of the town was unique compared to other settlements. As a
colonial governor recollected, São Paulo "was in the edges of a slightly
inclined circular plateau and rules over, in one direction, as far as
the sight could reach and, on the other, the multitude of gigantic
mountains that form the horizon."[^17] This stark contrast between an
impeding topography and an inviting flatland favored the engagement of
the inhabitants of colonial São Paulo with the interior. Nevertheless,
this process relied on spatial practices adequate to the exploitation of
the backlands. As an unknown set of environs, South America's interior
posed challenges that were slowly overcome by the people in the fringes
of the empire. By venturing the interior in search of land and labor
throughout the 17^th^ century, Luso Brazilians living far from the
center of the empire grew accustomed to the harshness of these
environments.

First, the highlands of São Paulo presented colonists with an abundant
supply of land, which was exploited through indigenous techniques of
cultivation known as *coivara* or *roça-de-toco* -- and, in modern
times, slash-and-burn, swidden, and itinerant agriculture. This farming
technique was based on the use of fire to clear tracts of forest and
fertilize the terrain. Initially, the land was very productive, but
yields plummeted after three or four seasons, forcing planters to find
locations with dense vegetation and restart the process.[^18] As they
moved further into the backlands, these colonists also extended the area
of Portuguese occupation. Farming grounds were often located several
miles away from urban centers, and colonists had to spend most of their
time interned in remote areas. Eventually, as suggested by Sergio
Buarque de Holanda, this spatial dynamic triggered the creation of new
urban cores as planters became too distant from their hometowns. When
that happened, settlers gathered together to found a new village,
organize their institutional apparatus, and resume religious services
and social life.

During the 17^th^ century, nine inland towns and three coastal ones were
created in the captaincy of São Vicente. They remained small, as the
creation of new settlements meant a demographic decline in former towns.
However, this process allowed the empire to extend itself to a large
area in the interior even with meager population growth.[^19]

{{< figure src="/img/image2.png" title=" " alt="Towns in the captaincy of São Vicente, 1550-1589" >}} {{< figure src="/img/image3.png" title=" " alt="Towns in the captaincy of São Vicente, 1590-1629" >}} {{< figure src="/img/image4.png" title=" " alt="Towns in the captaincy of São Vicente, 1630-1669" >}} {{< figure src="/img/image5.png" title="Figure 2." alt="Towns in the captaincy of São Vicente, 1670-1710" caption="Towns created in the captaincy of São Vicente between 1550 and 1710. These maps show two expanding frontiers. First, the towns of Parnaíba, Jundiaí, Itu, and Sorocaba followed the Tiete River westward, marking a vital route to access the central regions in South America. Second, colonists also populated the valley of the Paraíba River, creating the towns of Jacareí, Taubaté, Guaratinguetá, and Pindamonhagaba. In the second half of the 17th century, this string-like network of towns pointed colonists to the Cataguazes region, around 100 miles northeast. In these maps, labels appear only in towns created in the frame’s timespan. Dark gray represents areas with hilly topography." >}}


Labor was also a product of the frontier. Despite legal restrictions
imposed by the crown, the inhabitants of São Paulo relied heavily on
Indian slaves to compose a workforce. They toiled the land, worked as
servants and in a broad array of menial jobs, participated in warfare,
and had a pivotal role, as carriers, in sustaining the commercial links
the coast. Early on, missionaries undertook efforts to control native
labor by creating mission villages (*aldeamentos*) in the highlands.
They assembled indigenous populations that lived dispersed and rented
their work to Luso-Brazilian colonists through contract labor. However,
this model failed to provide a stable solution for the emerging
settlements, and colonists took upon themselves the task of producing a
workforce. [^20] They thus began to outfit expeditions, known as
*bandeiras* and *armações*, to enter the backlands and enslave
indigenous peoples. Initially, these raids centered around São Paulo,
but, with the dwindling population close to the colonial settlements,
expeditions increased the distances they traveled to find their prey.

The organization of these expeditions was largely a family activity.
Relatives, friends, and allies partnered to raise funds, gather
resources, exchange geographic information, and reassign Indians in
their possession to act as guides and porters.[^21] Since capital
investments were low -- explorers packed just a few items such as
firearms, gunpowder, and hammocks, and lived from what they gathered and
hunted -- the most valued resource was experienced Luso-Brazilian men
who could join these enterprises. Families invested heavily to increase
the number of people that could contribute to these expeditions. Male
children accompanied their fathers and relatives in the backlands as
part of their training and coming of age, hoping that they would learn
the techniques and knowledge necessary to survive in the backlands and
eventually lead expeditions on their own.[^22] Moreover, Portuguese
inheritance laws, which mandated the equal distribution of the
deceased's property among children and thus created a tendency of
downward mobility, also contributed to increasing the pressure over the
offspring to adventure the interior and incorporate new resources into
the family's pool. Lastly, relatives who stayed, including women, also
supported these expeditions by taking care of the family's business
during the absence of the travelers or by helping the parties from afar.

In a rare glimpse of the daily affairs of one of these expeditions, when
a participant died and left the inventory of his property, it is
possible to see the extensive, if not convoluted, way in which kinship
made wayfaring possible. On June 28, 1645, a fatally ill explorer,
Antonio Gomes Borba, summoned his colleague Francisco Bicudo Fernandes
to write his will. Borba lived in the frontier town of Santana do
Parnaíba with his wife and daughter, but his surname was a constant
reminder of his birthplace in Portugal. It is unclear when he moved to
Brazil, but it is certain that, once there, he strove to forge alliances
with local families that eventually led him to be part of that
expedition. The choices Borba made on his deathbed (or death-hammock)
reveal the strength of these relationships. He appointed Antônio Pedroso
de Alvarenga, his companion in the expeditions, as the curator of his
daughter's property. In fact, Alvarenga was already the godfather of
Borba's daughter, and both men were long-standing business partners. As
noted in the will, the only debtor that the wounded Portuguese men
remembered was Alvarenga's father, who owed Borba 4.5 tons of wheat.

After Borba's death, the personal belongings he had brought to the
backlands were auctioned among the members of the expedition, revealing
the names of other participants. In fact, Borba represented the end of
the chain of familial relationships -- in his case, through the
fictional though nonetheless indispensable spiritual kinship through
godparentage -- that sustained that *armação*. Borba's closest allies,
the Alvarengas, probably helped him to breach the social fabric of the
highlands of São Paulo, granting him access to a larger pool of
potential partners. Not only was the younger Alvarenga related through a
marital alliance to the will's scribe, but two of his brothers-in-law
(João and Antônio Bicudo de Brito) appeared among the members of the
expedition as well. A fourth cousin-in-law, Cristovão Aguiar Girão, also
accompanied them into the backlands. Besides the relationships
reconstituted through the genealogical data, the other two members of
the expedition shared the surnames of the other party members and, most
likely, were young men wayfaring together with their kinsfolk. Girão,
for instance, was the guarantor of a certain Manoel Girão in the
auction. Lastly, one of the leaders of the expedition, Captain Francisco
Siqueira, was related to this group through marriage -- he was the
stepfather of the writer of the will.

In all, this kin group included nine of the fifteen participants listed
in Borba's probate inventory. Besides Indians, who were silenced in this
documentation, there were probably other Luso-Brazilians in the
expedition, but the number of names listed in the record matches the
average size of a small expedition.[^23] Little is known about the other
names that appear on the list. Even the expedition leader, João Mendes
Geraldo, did not receive extensive attention in the genealogical
records, besides the fact that he brought along his son, Miguel
Gonçalves Correia, to the backlands. Neither do we know about the
destination of the expedition. Most likely, they were headed to the
*sertão* of the Paraná River, where two of the party members had visited
on previous expeditions: Cristovão de Aguiar Girão visited the region in
1638 and Francisco de Siqueira in 1641.[^24]

The prevalence of in-laws journeying the backlands together also
exemplifies the role of marital alliances in forging these partnerships
and fostering mobility. In fact, the sizable dowries that the families
of São Paulo reserved for their daughters, as demonstrated by Nazzari,
were an attempt to recruit sons-in-law for the pool of specialized
labor. Parents significantly favored their daughters in disposing of
property, as dowries, considered an advance inheritance, far exceeded
the sons' share in the bequests. By doing so, parents expected that
their daughters' family would be able to set up a new production unit,
and her in-laws would become a potential partner for the slave raids in
the backlands.[^25]

Interestingly, these marriages increased the sense of spatial cohesion
among the dispersed constellation of little towns in the highlands of
São Paulo. The small number of potential local spouses and the high
premium in finding a good match provided incentives to single men and
women to extend their spousal search outside town. The settlements
around São Paulo had, at best, only a few thousand residents and did not
offer many options of spouses that matched social and racial status,
kinship restrictions, and affinity. However, if willing to search for a
husband within a day-long horseback ride (\~30 mi), a single woman would
double the number of unmarried males and potential spouses; the increase
was threefold after two days of travel. Furthermore, searching for
spouses elsewhere would offer other advantages. Besides enabling access
to resources locally bound to other towns, such as fresh tracts of land,
marriages established with outside residents increased the alliances and
potential partnerships that a family could forge.[^26]

{{< figure src="/img/image6.png" title="Figure 3." alt="Spatial trajectories of spouses map" caption="Spatial trajectories of spouses in the second half of the 17^th^ century, based on places of birth and marriage. Line thickness represents the number of people that made the journey between two towns and, therefore, the strength of the connections forged by families established in different locations. To avoid over-fragmentation of the data, nearby towns -- like those that appear in Figures 1 and 2 -- are grouped in micro-regions named after the most important town. Lines are 'bundled' based on Anita Graser et al., 'Untangling Origin-Destination Flows in Geographic Information Systems,' *Information Visualization* 18, no. 1 (January 2019): 153--7." >}}

{{% notation title="Edge bundling and general trends" %}}

I used this edge-bundling technique to make the visualization more
readable and "abstract," in the sense that it highlights underlying
patterns in the data that are not apprehended from a single data point.
Edge bundling aims to reduce visual clutter by grouping (and deforming)
similar edges. In this case, the technique also helped to emphasize
connections between different regions (as the edges were bundled at a
regional scale) instead of between discrete locations. The following
maps compare the same dataset with (left) and without (right) bundled
edges:

{{< figure src="/img/Barleta-bundling.png" >}}

The strength of this method is to aggregate data and reveal broad
patterns (at the expense of the granularity of the data.) Because the
data is very dispersed (as visible in the many thin lines in the map on
the right), I opted to incorporate the presentation of data subsets in
the relevant sections of the text, but the focus remained on the overall
trends. Therefore, visualizations express general patterns and the text
discusses certain inter-regional connections to illustrate how they
functioned.

{{% /notation %}}

Genealogical data for the second half of the 17^th^ century illustrates
this strategy of expanding the radius of the spousal search. Figure 3
indicates the dislocation between the place of birth and wedding (n=135)
and reveals the preference for partners born outside town. For spouses
born and married in the captaincy of São Vicente (115), 60% married
outside their birthplace, while the remainder preferred to find spouses
locally. In older towns, such as São Vicente, São Paulo, and Mogi das
Cruzes, the ratio of local-to-regional marriages was less than 1 -- that
is, more people married outside, in a nearby town -- while there is a
clear preference for local matches in newer towns. There, local
marriages were at least twice (Itu) or three times (Sorocaba) as common
as regional ones, reinforcing the argument about the interest of these
colonists in the frontier zones. Older urban cores had potentially less
land available and thus exercised pressure for mobility; newer zones of
colonization unlocked unexplored pools of resources -- and moving there
increased their ability to exploit them.

Marriages outside the captaincy, possibly because of the geographic
coverage of the dataset, were rather infrequent (3 cases), whereas the
number of Portuguese immigrants marrying local women was significant but
still small (18 cases.) Interestingly, access to frontier resources to
these newcomers seemed to be hindered by their lack of local connections
as they settled in more consolidated cores. Most Portuguese men
(including two from the Azores) married in São Paulo or the coastal town
of São Vicente, while only two of them managed to find spouses inland,
in Itu. The data is also unclear about when the movement happened -- in
other words, if the mismatch between the place of birth and marriage
occurred before or was related to the union. Nevertheless, the
significant proportion of people marrying outside their hometowns offers
strong evidence that these restricted marriage markets helped to foster
mobility in the spatially dispersed urban network of the highlands of
São Paulo.

The consequence of the pattern of family-related mobility was that,
although the geographic extent of settlement increased rapidly, the
small urban enclaves remained socially connected among themselves and,
through frail links with the littoral, to the rest of the empire. In
this sense, the alliances forged through marriage weaved through the
discontinuous space in the highlands of São Paulo. While living in the
remoteness of their farms, ranches, and small villages, colonists
produced enduring ties with people in similar isolated circumstances. In
this sense, moving to the interior was not an act of leaving their
social world behind. On the contrary, it meant extending the Portuguese
colonization to a new region where, through these family links,
colonists reproduced their mode of living despite the weak grasp of the
Portuguese monarchy. These kinship networks guaranteed a cohesive and
densely linked social space.

The needs for fertile land, enslaved native labor, or spouses made the
inhabitants of São Paulo a distinctively mobile social group. They grew
accustomed to life in the isolation of the backlands, in their farms and
away from the urban cores; learned to travel long distances and survive
in the harsh environment of the backlands; and developed social
practices that, even in a sparsely populated region, granted spatial
cohesion and belonging to the empire. Nevertheless, the geographic
extent of the Portuguese occupation remained limited to the towns
neighboring São Paulo, and its enlargement did not mean significant
demographic growth. Although the expansion of agriculture gradually
claimed more land for the king of Portugal, long-distance expeditions
resulted in a process of depopulation of the backlands. The spread of
diseases, warfare, disruption of communities, and forced relocation to
Portuguese settlements sharply reduced the size of indigenous groups
living in the interior of the continent.[^27]

# The Portuguese Occupation of the Backlands

The spatial practices that the inhabitants of São Paulo developed during
the 17^th^ century acquired distinctive meanings after the discovery of
rich mineral deposits in central Brazil. Expeditions departing from the
inland towns of the captaincy spotted several gold strikes in the
interior during the 1690s, and the settling of these areas followed
rapidly. These discoveries were intimately related to the wayfaring of
the people of São Paulo, who redeployed their knowledge and experience
in journeying the vast interior of South America to fulfill the
long-standing hopes of uncovering mineral treasuries. Moreover, the mode
of spatial organization of the settlements that were created in these
remote areas resembled that of the constellation of small towns in the
highlands of São Paulo. Social ties, such as those established through
marital alliances, remained spatially dispersed, facilitating economic
transactions, information exchange, spread of Portuguese institutions,
and cultural assimilation -- despite the gargantuan distances that set
settlements apart. On the one hand, to a broad sector of São Paulo's
society, the mobility of relatives increased the access to the resources
of the backlands (now including mineral wealth); on the other, it helped
to consolidate the Portuguese occupation and extension of the empire to
these remote areas.

The leading role of the inhabitants of São Paulo in mineral prospecting
came about with the confluence of the growing knowledge about the
backlands and the recognition by imperial administrators of this
vocation. Simultaneously to their wayfaring in the 17^th^ century, the
monarchy commissioned explorers to search for precious minerals that
were believed to be hidden in the heartlands of the continent. Gold
strikes were eventually found along some rivers, but the proceedings
were below the expectations and the overall enterprise was considered a
tremendous debacle.[^28] The sense of disappointment was so huge that a
governor, when commissioned to this task, replied to his superior that
"even though he was put in charge of the examination and inspection of
the gold and silver mines of Paranaguá, Itabaiana, and Serra de
Sabarabuçu, he would not go on this commission, because it was already
collapsing and therefore he had not made any progress."[^29]

The frustration with the consecutive failures of crown-appointed
explorers made the crown call upon the people of São Paulo. While
cynical about his own chances of finding minerals, the governor provided
an alternative in a report he read in the Overseas Council. It suggested
that the inhabitants of São Paulo "should be the righteous discoverers
of the treasuries that nature and fortune deposited most appropriately
in the lands they first settled." Not only did they have the right, but
also the skills, experience, and ingenuity required to carry on this
enterprise, argued the governor. [^30] Despite their negative
reputation, these imperial subjects had been summoned on a few occasions
to support the empire in enterprises related to the backlands. Troops
from São Paulo had joined the fight against the Dutch and the backlands
of Angola as well as had a pivotal role in the destruction of the
Quilombo dos Palmares, a community of fugitive slaves in the northeast's
interior. Over time, terms like *mamelucos*, *paulistas*, *sertanejos*,
and *sertanistas*, used to describe the population of São Paulo, became
synonyms for wayfaring the backlands.[^31]

In fact, the idea of calling these subjects to the task of uncovering
mineral wealth materialized even before the governor offered his opinion
in Lisbon. Families from São Paulo were already supporting crown
explorers and prospecting expeditions with stores, Indian slaves, and
information, but, after receiving a series of royal letters in the
1670s, they took a more active attitude in mineral prospecting. In these
letters, the king assured, as existing legislation already mandated, an
extensive series of privileges such as nobility titles, gifts, pensions,
and royal favor to the discoverers of the mines in Brazil, prompting
several of these *sertanejos* to repurpose their journeys in the
backlands to conduct mineral prospecting. The most notorious attempt was
led by veteran slaver Fernão Dias Paes. He spent many years in the
Cataguazes region in the late 1670s, supposedly finding emeralds (which
turned out to be semi-precious tourmalines), but his death in the
backlands at the age of 73 abbreviated these efforts. Other expeditions
followed, including one led by crown explorer D. Rodrigo de
Castel-Blanco in 1681, which counted with the participation of local
residents. Yet conclusive evidence of mineral deposits was only reported
in the late 1690s.[^32]

Although mineral prospecting intensified in the late 17^th^ century and
slavers gradually turned into prospectors and miners, the mode of
journeying the backlands remained the same. The socioeconomic
organization of the prospecting expeditions still relied on relatives to
raise resources and recruit qualified explorers, and the techniques of
moving and surviving in the backlands resembled those of the older
generation of *sertanejos*. Most important, the repertoire of
geographical knowledge and travel itineraries developed over a century
of wanderings and nurtured within family informed the steps taken by
these explorers. Kinsfolk revisited regions where relatives traveled to
enslave Indians, now with a different purpose. In this sense, the
inhabitants of São Paulo redeployed the spatial practices when they saw
the opportunity, under assurances of the crown, to reap the benefits of
mining in Brazil.

Unsurprisingly, the region where the first gold strikes were spotted has
been the object of interest of the inhabitants of São Paulo since the
mid-17^th^ century. The Cataguazes region, which gained its name from an
Indian group that inhabited the area, was associated with the
long-standing indigenous myth of the Sabarabuçu mountain, reputed as the
Brazilian Eldorado.[^33] Besides this marvelous geography, the dynamics
imposed by slash-and-burn agriculture and the craving for Indians slaves
stirred the people of São Paulo in that direction. As they extended the
farmable area over the Atlantic rainforest to compensate for the
exhausted farmland, they reached the valley of the Paraíba River (on the
edges of the Cataguazes) around the 1640s, leading to the foundation of
the town of Taubaté. In the following decades, the area between the
Serra do Mar and the Serra da Mantiqueira, a stretch of land
approximately 100 miles long and 10 miles wide, saw the creation of two
other towns -- Guaratinguetá (1651) and Pindamonhangaba (1705) -- with
the older urban core of Taubaté becoming almost as large as the town of
São Paulo by the end of the century.[^34] Around the same period,
slaving expeditions started to focus on that valley and adjacent
regions. In fact, with the relocation of the Jesuit mission further
south in Spanish territory, the Cataguazes became the preferred region
for slave raids, and at least 30 different expeditions journeyed the
area (around half of all expeditions listed by Monteiro for the second
half of the 17^th^ century.)[^35]

The geographical knowledge produced through traveling the backlands and
shared among kinsfolk was crucial for the success of prospecting
enterprises. For example, the itinerary that led to one of the first
discoveries, spearheaded by Bartolomeu Bueno da Siqueira in 1697, was
given by his brother-in-law Antônio Rodrigues Arzão.[^36] Moreover,
although he established the route in the years preceding his death in
1696, Arzão was probably very familiar with the region as his father and
an uncle led expeditions there in 1662 and 1679.[^37] In a similar vein,
the unsuccessful expedition of Fernão Dias Paes was resumed by his son
Garcia. He was already in charge of the returning party after the death
of his father, but, after arriving in São Paulo, Garcia outfitted a new
expedition to return to the same area. There, his uncle awaited with
equipment and subsistence plots. In the early 18^th^ century, Garcia
traveled to the region again, now under the auspices of the
governor-general of Brazil, to open a road between the mining region and
Rio de Janeiro.[^38]

Family knowledge was also crucial for mineral discoveries in other
regions of central Brazil. In 1720, a partnership of three veteran
*sertanejos* -- a father-in-law with a son-in-law and his brother --
organized an expedition to Goiás, which was justified on the grounds
that the expedition leader "was familiar for have already wandered the
backlands of the Americas in expeditions they have done." [^39] When he
was a 12-year-old boy, Bartolomeu joined his namesake father in a
slaving raid against the Goiá people, acquiring extensive knowledge
about the human geography of the region, as attested by the
comprehensive listing of ethnic groups in the petition to the captaincy
governor. With official approval, they outfitted an expedition that
spent three years exploring the region until they found plentiful gold
strikes.

Similarly, kinship networks also paved the way for the occupation of
these areas. For instance, the members of the expedition led by
Siqueira, as recollected by an early settler, "after finding gold in
significant amounts, sowed new plots and sent out for their relatives
and friends in São Paulo and nearby towns to come there and establish
themselves."[^40] The expedition to Goiás probably functioned in the
same way, as the genealogical records show that several relatives of the
expedition leaders ended up settling in the region. From the
son-in-law's side, whose extended family lived in the coastal town of
São Sebastião, at least six people (among their and their siblings'
children) migrated to Goiás during their lives. In the next generation
of the family, three grandchildren (whose parents did not migrate) also
moved there.

The transformation of slavers into miners also favored more permanent
forms of settlement and territorialization. Besides the creation of new
towns in the manner and style of Portuguese legislation, requests for
land grants (*sesmarias*) had a pivotal role in laying out an
institutional ground for the extension of the Portuguese empire in the
backlands. Again, the wayfaring of relatives informed where colonists
claimed these new tracts of land. For instance, in the 1720s and 1730s,
Luis Pedroso de Barros and his brother requested a few plots in the
headwaters of the Paranapanema River, a couple hundred miles southward
of São Paulo, precisely in the region where his father-in-law discovered
placer gold in the late 17^th^ century. The petitions used several
toponyms, including the indigenous names of rivers in the Paranapanema
watershed, revealing their extensive knowledge about the region's
physical geography.[^41]

Land claiming also took the form of a family enterprise, as suggested by
the strategies adopted by Luis' kin. In 1704, a coalition of 26
supplicants led by his uncle, Pedro Taques de Almeida (with his
children, siblings, and in-laws), requested an enormous land grant of
900,000 hectares (2.2 million acres) in the region next to his nephew's
properties. (The extended family filed another petition, almost
identical in its form, dimensions, and claimants, but requesting land in
the Minas Gerais region.) The artifice of enlisting the entire family to
justify the enormous proportions of the grants did not persuade the
governor, who only approved the standard 2,000 hectares (5,000 acres)
plots for the family.[^42] The temporary setback did not inhibit the
family's ambitions. In the following years, family members requested,
individually or in small groups, several other plots in the lands
adjacent to the first concession. By the 1720s, the family held more
than 30 land grants in the region, almost recreating the extent of the
original request.[^43] Besides incorporating these lands through
judicial instruments recognized by the empire, these requests registered
for the first time the names of faraway, unheard-of places in the
records of the bureaucracy of the empire.

Land ownership did not diminish the mobility of the people of São Paulo.
In fact, the survival of settlements created in the backlands depended
on the continual exchanges that the flow of people afforded, and several
of the families of first settlers kept property, businesses, agents, and
political and social relations spread between distant locations. The
land grants requested by the Taques de Almeida family, for instance,
were used to create ranches, which were managed through an agent.[^44]
On these properties, the clan raised livestock that was sold in the
interior of São Paulo and in mining areas, where the family kept a
flourishing commercial enterprise.[^45] Eventually, two young members of
the family moved to the region and married into the local elite,
reinforcing the ties that the clan forged with this distant district.

In the years following the discovery of minerals, several inhabitants of
São Paulo relocated to the expanding zones of the Portuguese occupation.
The dislocation between birth and marriage in genealogical records
(Figure 4) indicates that these individuals remained seeking marital
alliances outside their hometowns. In the south, the mobility of spouses
paralleled an emerging livestock economy, such as suggested by the
trajectory of the Taques de Almeida family. Marital alliances in the
towns associated with ranching, such as Itu, Sorocaba, and Curitiba,
strengthened while a significant contingent of São Paulo-born people
continued to move to these frontier towns. Furthermore, these
settlements also began to send spouses to the extreme south of
Portuguese America, in the territory of Rio de Grande de São Pedro, a
major livestock supplier for the rest of the colony.[^46]

{{% notation title="Figure 4" %}}

If I were to choose a visualization that best encapsulates my argument,
it would be this one. It shows the scale of the movement undertaken by
the inhabitants of São Paulo and demonstrates, through the thickness of
the lines, how kinship connected different locations. The overall
impression I try to make is a space that is connected and made cohesive
through family ties.

{{% /notation %}}

{{< figure src="/img/image7.png" title="Figure 4." alt="Spatial trajectories of spouse map" caption="Spatial trajectories of spouses in the first half of the 18th century (1700-1750), based on places of birth and marriage extracted from genealogical records. The interwoven space of the highlands of São Paulo in the 17th century acquired a broader geographic extent in the first half of the 18th century." >}}

Inter-regional connections were stronger with the captaincy of Minas
Gerais, represented by the towns of São João del Rei, São José del Rei,
Vila Rica, and Mariana. Neither the month-long journey from the port of
Santos, nor military conflicts between São Paulo-born settlers and
"outsiders" in the first years of settlement, nor the political autonomy
of the region, which became an independent captaincy in 1720, lessened
the ties between the regions.[^47] Southern Minas Gerais and the
northern part of the captaincy of São Paulo, notably Taubaté, were
tightly connected. Of the 51 spouses born in this town, 19 entered
wedlock in the mining region while only 14 chose to establish themselves
in a different location within the limits of São Paulo. People from São
Paulo, Jundiaí, and Mogi-Mirim and adjacent towns also married in the
mining region, but in smaller proportions.

Portuguese-born men were the group that appeared the most among the
spouses recorded in the genealogical data for the first half of the
18^th^ century. They were listed marrying in the same regions in which
the inhabitants of São Paulo were established, including older and newer
urban cores of the captaincy as well as in the expanding mining zones.
At least 50 grooms and a few brides found their spouses in Minas Gerais,
but the majority preferred to enter wedlock in the former captaincy. The
city of São Paulo, for instance, received 44 spouses from Portugal and
the Atlantic islands (mostly from the Azores); other towns in the
captaincy, on average, welcomed a dozen of them each. Their inclusion in
the genealogical data, which register their strategy of joining local
families, shows a distinct picture of wandering men looking for fortune
in faraway mining regions, as often depicted in the historiography.
Instead, the fact that nearly three quarters of the Portuguese spouses
married in the inland towns of São Paulo suggests that they first
established themselves, through marital alliances, in consolidated
places where they forged local relationships that eventually enabled
them to depart to the interior.

Goiás and Mato Grosso, two other important mining regions, were nearly
absent from the registers of spousal mobility in the first half of the
18^th^ century. Not only the late discovery of these regions, after the
third decade of that century, account for this anomaly, but the lack of
inter-regional unions between São Paulo and these new areas points to a
distinct spatial dynamic. First, most of the records of those who
married in Goiás and Mato Grosso did not indicate the place of birth. In
fact, natives from the most established São Paulo families tended to
have their places of birth under-recorded, as their attachment to their
hometown was implicit in the family narrative. Birth information was
more prevalent to outsiders joining these family lineages. Second, as
suggested in the vignette of the first expedition that uncovered gold in
Goiás, it is likely that many of the marital alliances were established
in São Paulo and facilitated their movement in the interior. As in the
slaving raids of the previous century, marrying locally would allow them
to marshal resources face the hardships of travel. For most of the
18^th^ century, reaching Mato Grosso would take five to seven months
through a combination of riverine and overland routes, while to Goiás
was a couple of months away by land.[^48] The movement to these regions
would go unrecorded in the genealogies.

This trend changed in the second half of the 18^th^ century.
Genealogical records for this period (Figure 5) mentioned Goiás and Mato
Grosso more often. Still, they indicated a different pattern in the
movement: they were mostly traveling eastward, returning from the mining
areas to the towns of São Paulo. The dataset shows at least 30
individuals that were in Goiás and Mato Grosso and returned to the
captaincy to enter wedlock. Furthermore, they displayed a clear
preference for the westernmost towns of the captaincy, with Itu and
Sorocaba heading the list. The choice of returning to the captaincy of
São Paulo was not unusual. These spouses were looking for partners in
regions that had been associated with their families even before they
were born and where they had cultivated, despite being away for many
years, strong social, political, and economic connections.

{{< figure src="/img/image8.png" title="Figure 5." alt="Spatial trajectories of spouses map." caption="Spatial trajectories of spouses in the second half of the 18th century (1750-1800), based on places of birth and marriage listed in the genealogical records. Although the mobility of spouses kept the same geographic extent, the proportion of long-distance trajectories decreased during the period, favoring short-distance mobility. Connections between urban centers in São Paulo with Mato Grosso and Goiás reveal a large number of “returnees” – people that were born in the mining areas but returned to their parents’ hometowns to marry." >}}

The sparseness of the dataset does not allow an appraisal of the scale
of the flow of returnees. However, cases of two-way, multi-generational
mobility, such as represented by João and Maria's vignette at the
beginning of this article, offer compelling evidence of the reiteration
over time of journeys between the newer settlements in the backlands and
São Paulo. Another paradigmatic case is a family headed by Isabel de
Campos, who married a young man from Guaratinguetá in her hometown, Itu,
in 1746. Eventually, the couple moved to Goiás and had seven children
there. In 1771, when the sixth child was born in that mining district,
Isabel's oldest child was in Itu marrying a local man. In the following
years, the remaining children also relocated to Itu and married there,
and none of them seem to have moved again: all six of Isabel's
grandchildren listed in the *Genealogia* ended up marrying locally in
Itu by the turn of the 18^th^ century.

João and Maria's or Isabel's family mobility represents a larger pattern
and illustrates the decision of moving of many colonists. These spatial
practices suggest the maintenance over time of the connections between
distant places and resemble, to a much larger geographic extent, the
dispersed but cohesive space of the highlands of São Paulo in the 17^th^
century. In a sense, these people developed a way of living between two
or more places and became accustomed to distance and absences. Marital
alliances created enduring relationships that, on the one hand, enabled
mobility to new frontier zones and, on the other, guaranteed a home and
community to those who returned. Indeed, the homeland was always there,
and several individuals that were lured to the mining frontiers in the
early years retired in the property they held or inherited in São Paulo
-- though these stories are less visible in the genealogical records.
The fact that their return (and that of their children) seemed to happen
effortlessly indicates that the ties to their hometowns never faded
away.

The patterns gathered from this analysis also hint at spatial practices
that are not evident in the genealogical records. While the mismatch
between the place of birth and marriage provides an overall sense of
circulation of people across space, the existence of the social ties
after many years suggests that the volume of traffic between these
locations was higher than recorded in the data. Once again, snippets of
a life story, entangled in the dense web of family relationships,
highlight the main characteristics of these itinerant lives.

{{% notation title="Limitations of the method and alternative examples" %}}

In this section, I'm attempting to further my argument even though the
main evidentiary base -- the genealogical dataset -- is limited. While
the dataset gives the overall picture of the spatial practices of the
inhabitants of São Paulo, it offers less about the texture and scale of
their mobile lifestyles. These aspects of social life aren't easily
translated as data. By reconstituting the life story of Pedro Taques de
Almeida Paes Leme using other sources, I tried to give the dimensions to
which his life and his contemporaries' were lived simultaneously in many
places.

The option of sidelining methodological discussion made this transition
easier however. Since my narrative isn't an exploration of a method and
its potentialities, I could, without any embarrassment, simply move to a
different approach to qualify part of the argument I was making. I
didn't feel the need to have a long discussion about the limitations of
my method, for instance.

{{% /notation %}}

# A Mobile Life in the Backlands

In 1714, Pedro Taques de Almeida Paes Leme was born in the city of São
Paulo to two of the most distinguished families of the captaincy.
Pedro's mother was one of the 26 petitioners who, under the leadership
of his grandfather, requested the enormous land grants in Curitiba and
Minas Gerais. His family had been associated with mining since the early
17^th^ century when his great-great-grandfather (also named Pedro
Taques) accompanied the first crown-appointed explorer to inspect the
mines of São Paulo and stayed in the region. Since then, the lineage of
the Taques had occupied several leadership positions in the captaincy
and engaged actively in slave-raiding and exploiting of the backlands.
They were part of the expeditions that discovered mineral wealth in
central Brazil, and several of Pedro's close relatives were among the
first Luso-Brazilian settlers of Minas Gerais. The father's side, the
Lemes family, was even more prominent. They settled in São Vicente in
the mid-16^th^ century and sprawled across several towns in the
highlands of São Paulo. The family also included several *sertanejos*,
like Pedro's uncle Fernão Dias Paes, the leader of the famed expedition
to search for emeralds. The wayfaring of the backlands was part of his
family legacy.

During his lifetime, mostly spent in São Paulo, Pedro developed a strong
relationship with Goiás. His father was one of the three partners of the
excursion that discovered gold in that region, being responsible for
raising funds and supporting the expedition while it was in the
backlands. As part of the agreement with the other leaders (his brother
and his brother's father-in-law) and colonial authorities, Pedro's
father gained the right to explore the passage (that is, charge toll) of
three rivers in the route to Goiás for three generations. When his
father died in 1738, Pedro and his siblings inherited these rights as
well as ranches in Curitiba (created in the land grants he requested
with his father-in-law) and several business assets in Mato Grosso,
which were managed through an agent.[^49]

Little is known about Pedro's younger years, besides his education in
the local Jesuit school and his appointment as sergeant-major of the
militia in 1737, two years after his first marriage to the daughter of
the cavalry captain of Goiás. Although familiar with the region since he
was young, Pedro's first recorded trip to Goiás only happened at the age
of 35, when he relocated to the mines of Pilar, a thriving mining
center, in the mid-18^th^ century. He spent five years there supervising
his business and serving as a fiscal officer. After accumulating a small
fortune, he briefly returned to São Paulo but soon departed for Lisbon,
where he intended to petition the higher courts of the kingdom for
confirmation of the rights of passage he inherited, which were under
judicial litigation. The travel was untimely, as he reached the empire's
capital a few days before the catastrophic 1755 earthquake that
destroyed Lisbon, including Pedro's personal property and documents he
brought to support his case. Although unsuccessful in his primary goal,
Pedro returned to Brazil in 1757, holding the office of Treasurer of the
Bull of the Holy Crusade (to collect indulgences sold to support warfare
and rescue of Catholic captives in North Africa) of the captaincies of
São Paulo, Goiás, and Mato Grosso. His experience with mining also
gained him another office in the following years, Keeper (*guarda-mor*)
of the Mines of São Paulo, in 1763, which required him to travel to
several parts of the captaincy.

In the same way Pedro's fortune was associated with the distant Goiás,
it was also the source of his demise. A decade after taking office as
Treasurer, one of the agents he appointed to oversee the selling of the
bulls in Goiás failed to remit the proceedings, making Pedro default the
royal coffers. As a consequence, he had most of his property confiscated
and sold in a public auction. His reputation was also ruined. In 1771,
Pedro was recorded as a resident of the city of São Paulo, living off of
the products of his small rural estates, but, as his biographer noted,
he kept another agent in Goiás managing gold extraction in the mining
fields he still owned.[^50] A few years before his death in 1777, Pedro
traveled again to Lisbon to appeal for his paternal rights over the
route to Goiás, successfully this time. The good news came late, though,
as Pedro died soon after returning to his hometown.

The vital events of Pedro's life --birth, death, and three marriages --
all happened in the same location, the city of São Paulo. Therefore, the
connections to the places that shaped the course of his life were
overlooked in the analysis of the trajectory of spouses. Furthermore, as
with most of the people who settled in the backlands during the 18^th^
century, it is impossible to tell how many times Pedro took the route to
Goiás or any other region in which he and his family held businesses.
Still, his life undoubtedly depended on events happening simultaneously
in several parts of the empire. From the decision about mining policies,
grants, and offices taken in Lisbon to the organization of expeditions
by his ancestors, the spread and mobility of relatives, and the creation
of partnerships through family and agents, the life of Pedro was carried
out in this fragmented geography and only possible through his capacity
to move and forge lasting connections across space.

For the crown, these spatial practices and the dispersed-but-woven
geography it produced enabled the extension of its empire in the
backlands at an unprecedented scale. Although not directly acting in the
name of the empire, the wayfaring and settling of the families of São
Paulo unlocked a massive pool of resources that precipitated the
creation of the imperial bureaucracy in these new areas. These settlers
composed the bodies of governance, commanded local militia, and
organized the fiscal and judicial apparatuses of the state -- they were
the *de facto* representatives of the empire in these distant regions.
Furthermore, their mobility also facilitated the economic integration of
the backlands. Settling required the reallocation of the family assets,
the formation of new commercial circuits, and the constant flow of
information. Overall, the mobility of people like Pedro rendered an
abstract notion of "conquest" that was claimed by the king of Portugal
into a real part of the empire.

# Regionalizing Networks

In the second half of the 18^th^ century, the spatial practices of the
inhabitants of São Paulo became constrained to a reduced geographic
extent as inter-regional connections weakened. Over time, these family
networks tended to become regional as the dynamism of the mining economy
began to wear off. The genealogical records demonstrate that the
percentage of spouses marrying outside their captaincy of origin,
including both São Paulo and Minas Gerais, decreased significantly
during this period. The only town that continued sending spouses to
distant places at the same rate was São José del Rei, a mining town in
southern Minas Gerais, whose natives married in twelve different
locations of three captaincies (mostly in São Paulo.) Most likely, they
represent a large group of returnees from a region that had strong
connections with traditional family branches of São Paulo. Nevertheless,
the proportion of spouses marrying outside their captaincy of origin
nearly halved in the other towns.

  | **Place of Birth** | **1700-1750**  | **1750-1800** |
  | ------------------ | -------------- | ------------- |
  | *Captaincy of São Paulo* |  |  |                 
  | Itu                          | 4.4% (45)   |    3.4% (87) ↓ |
  | Jundiaí                      | 18.2% (11)  |    7.5% (93) ↓ |
  | Mogi das Cruzes              | 25.0% (20)  |    12.7% (63) ↓ |
  | São Paulo                    | 10.9% (128) |    4.4% (248) ↓ |
  | Taubaté                      | 31.4% (51)  |    18.9% (95) ↓ |
  | *Captaincy of Minas Gerais*  |  |  |                 
  | São José del Rei             | 14.3% (14)  |    14.6% (41) ↑ |
  | São João del Rei             | 29.4% (17)  |    18.6% (355) ↓ |

*Table 1*. Percentage of spouses that married outside their captaincy of
origin. Data suggests, in most cases, a decrease in long-distance
relationships. Numbers in parentheses indicate the total number of
observations (i.e., the total number of marriages for the period). The
table only includes towns with more than ten observations.

{{% notation title="Maps and tables" %}}

One of the main virtues of maps is to offer a quick way of considering
distance, in its multiple forms, as part of the analysis (as summarized
in Tobler's "first law of geography": "near are more related than
distant things."\*) In this article, Figures 3 to 5 attempt to convey
the idea that, even though locations are set apart in space, strong
family ties connected them and structured inter-regional exchanges in an
expanding territory. The location and geographic scale in which certain
events happened (i.e., birth and marriages) were crucial to the
argument, and maps were effective ways of visualizing the phenomenon.
However, in many cases, maps are not necessarily the only or the most
effective form of representing or analyzing spatial phenomena. In this
case, as distance is not a primary explanatory variable and the data
selection is small, tables are quite effective because they capture
broad trends (highlighted with the "trend arrows") while offering
granular information. This and the next tables show general patterns
that are geographically discrete (that is, not influenced by the other
locations) and happened *in spite of* their location. See Waldo Tobler,
"A computer movie simulating urban growth in the Detroit region,"
*Economic Geography*, 46 (1970): 236.

{{% /notation %}}

At the same time, certain regional connections became stronger. For
example, Itu and Sorocaba, which were about a day of travel from each
other, increased the number of spouses they exchanged. Families from Itu
increased the proportion of bachelors they sent to Sorocaba to enter
wedlock, from a fifth to a quarter of the total number of recorded
marriages. The same happened in the opposite direction: 42% (of 115) of
the documented marriages of Sorocaba-born people happened in Itu, in
contrast to the previous 35% (of 37.) Through these connections, this
livestock-producing region became increasingly socially cohesive.

This process of regionalization is also visible in the increasing
proportion of people that died in the same places they entered wedlock.
With the notable exception of the city of São Paulo, the tendency of
permanently settling after marriage became stronger as the 18^th^
century passed (Table 2.) Marriage and the formation of a new household
reduced or ceased the mobility of individuals. Furthermore, the
outwardness of São Paulo -- the only place that decreased in
post-marriage permanent settling -- is deceptive. Besides four
individuals that died in Goiás and Mato Grosso after marrying in that
city, the remaining 119 recorded colonists died either in São Paulo or
one of the inland towns of the captaincy. The shift of the direction of
the movement, from the mining regions to nearby towns, marked the
increasing centrality that the city had in the spatial organization of
the captaincy. São Paulo had already been the central node of the urban
network in the captaincy since the early 17^th^ century, but colonists
gravitated towards frontier towns as they concentrated the most coveted
resources. By the end of the century, the situation changed. The
political restoration of the captaincy in 1765 strengthened São Paulo's
hegemony, and the exchanges within the captaincy became more dependent
on connections to the capital.

  | **Towns**  |       **1700-1750**  | **1750-1800** |
  |------------|----------------------|-------------|
  |Itu       |        73.4% (128)  |   87.8% (123) ↑|
  |Jundiaí    |       75.9% (29)   |   98.9% (95) ↑|
  |Mogi das Cruzes  | 81.1% (53)   |   87.8% (47) ↑|
  |São Paulo     |    71.3% (147)  |   45.5% (124) ↓|
  |Taubaté        |   79.3% (29)   |   87.9% (33) ↑|

*Table 2*. Percentage of recorded deaths in which the deceased died in
the same place as he or she was born. The growing proportion of this
type of case suggests the decline in geographic mobility towards the end
of the 18^th^ century.

The restoration of the captaincy also changed the imperial attitude
towards the mobility of the inhabitants of São Paulo. In 1750, the new
secretary of state, Marquis de Pombal, rose to power, leading a series
of administrative reforms in Portugal and its overseas empire.[^51]
After arriving in 1765, new governor D. Luís Antonio de Sousa
implemented economic and military reforms and reorganized the
captaincy's territory. He founded towns, carried out censuses, enacted
anti-vagrancy laws, and implemented state-sponsored migration to the
frontier regions and other policies that conflicted with a quite mobile
population. The governor envisioned a captaincy formed by a collection
of well-ordered, disciplined settlements under his firm control -- and
he perceived the wayfaring and dispersion of the people of São Paulo as
a considerable obstacle to it.[^52]

Still, despite the challenges posed by colonial authorities, the
mobility of the inhabitants of São Paulo was repurposed in the imperial
narratives and became instrumental for geopolitical goals. In 1750, when
Spanish and Portuguese ambassadors came to the negotiation table to
discuss the inter-imperial boundaries in the Americas, the footprints
left by their spatial practices were vital to sustain Portuguese
ambitions of an enlarged territory. By suggestion of Alexandre de
Gusmão, a São Paulo-born diplomat who led the negotiations for the
Portuguese camp, the plenipotentiaries meeting in Madrid adopted the
legal principle of *uti possidetis*, which granted possession to those
who occupied the land in practice, to solve the territorial
quarrel.[^53] The settlements the people of São Paulo created and
sustained in the interior, even though small and sparse, and the
extensive geographic knowledge they produced allowed the Portuguese to
consolidate the frontier westward. Indeed, the map used during the
negotiations -- the well-known *Mapa das Cortes* -- included information
provided by these early explorers.[^54]

During the "golden age" of colonial Brazil, family relationships shaped
the movement of colonists in the interior of South America. By sharing
information about the backlands, providing resources to expeditions, and
creating an intangible structure to foster these spatial practices,
families from São Paulo developed a model of empire-building hitherto
untested by the Portuguese. The insular mode of spatial organization
typical of overseas domains, where coastal settlements were connected
through maritime routes, was partially replicated inland. Not unlike the
fortresses, trading posts, and port cities that composed the overseas
empire, the towns, villages, parishes, ranches, and mining camps in the
backlands were small pockets of European occupation where colonists
congregated to carry out their lives according to Portuguese customs and
laws while conducting their businesses and family affairs.

Nevertheless, the way these locations in the backlands remained
connected to the rest of the empire differed from their counterparts in
the littoral. Instead of a regular transit of ships, people organized
expeditions among relatives to travel to isolated regions of the
continent. When settled, they preserved the social ties that connected
them to their hometowns, which facilitated a piecemeal, everyday type of
mobility that made these distant locations an integral part of the
empire. Family ties connected not only people, but a territory otherwise
highly fragmented. In a broad sense, the mobility of kin created
inter-regional networks that sustained territories claimed by states, in
geographical settings which these political units and their bureaucracy
were poorly equipped to face.

These patterns of mobility are beyond the analysis of individual
trajectories. While a long tradition of *bandeirismo* studies celebrated
the journeys of intrepid explorers that expanded the frontiers of
Brazil, approaching the lives of the inhabitants of São Paulo from the
impersonal lenses of digital methods rendered an alternative story. It
is less about the exceptionality of travel than the routines that the
frontier societies developed to cope with distance and isolation. A
myriad of forms of moving is ingrained in the social fabric of the
Portuguese-occupied areas in the backlands. These stories have been told
at the local level, showing the role of mobility in shaping society on a
small scale. Digital methods afforded re-placing the analysis of spatial
practices in a broader geographic and temporal scale. It also offered
new tools to produce and analyze a large corpus and represent the
findings and argument. As such, they allowed showing how the tedious,
everyday wayfaring of these people shaped a massive spatial
reorganization of the Portuguese empire in the 18^th^ century.

[^1]: Nossa Senhora da Candelária (Itu, São Paulo, Brazil), *Marriages
    -- Book 1, 1703-1728*, fl. 40. "Marriage of João Antunes Maciel and
    Maria Leite, 1715." Family History Library microfilm 1251651, item
    3.

[^2]: During the colonial era, the term "São Paulo" designated different
    but overlapping geographic locations. First, São Paulo was the name
    of a town created in the late 16th century in the captaincy of São
    Vicente. With the growing importance of the town, contemporaries
    used the town's name to refers to the entire region around the town
    and, sometimes, to the captaincy of São Vicente. The formal name
    change happened in 1711 when São Paulo was promoted to the status of
    city and was recognized as the captaincy's capital. In this article,
    São Paulo refers to the captaincy on most occasions, but I used the
    official designations ("town," "captaincy," "city") when they were
    relevant for the argument.

[^3]: C. R. Boxer, *The Portuguese Seaborne Empire, 1415-1825* (London:
    Hutchinson & Co., 1969); A. J. R. Russell-Wood, *The Portuguese
    Empire, 1514-1808: A World on the Move* (Baltimore; London: The John
    Hopkins University Press, 1998).

[^4]: Laura de Mello e Souza, *Desclassificados do ouro: A pobreza
    mineira no século XVIII* (Rio de Janeiro: Graal, 2004); Laura de
    Mello e Souza, "Formas provisórias de existência: A vida cotidiana
    nos caminhos, nas fronteiras e nas fortificações," in *História da
    vida privada no Brasil vol. 1: Cotidiano e vida privada na América
    portuguesa*, ed. Laura de Mello e Souza and Fernando A. Novais, (São
    Paulo: Companhia das Letras, 1998), 41--82; Sheila de Castro Faria,
    *A colônia em movimento: Fortuna e família no cotidiano colonial*
    (Rio de Janeiro: Editora Nova Fronteira, 1998). In addition to these
    works, a growing body of scholarship emphasizes indigenous mobility
    as a form of resistance and negotiated accommodation in the face of
    colonial rule, cf. Heather F. Roller, *Amazonian Routes: Indigenous
    Mobility and Colonial Communities in Northern Brazil* (Stanford:
    Stanford University Press, 2014); Karen V. Powers, *Andean Journeys:
    Migration, Ethnogenesis, and the State in Colonial Quito*
    (Albuquerque: University of New Mexico, 2009); Cynthia Radding,
    *Wandering Peoples: Colonialism, Ethnic Spaces, and Ecological
    Frontiers in Northwestern Mexico, 1700-1850* (Durham: Duke
    University Press, 1997).

[^5]: C. R. Boxer, *Golden Age of Brazil 1695-1750: Growing Pains of a
    Colonial Society* (Berkeley: University of California Press, 1975);
    Russell-Wood, *The Portuguese Empire, 1514-1808: A World on the
    Move*.

[^6]: Alida C. Metcalf, *Family and Frontier in Colonial Brazil: Santana
    de Parnaíba, 1580-1822* (Austin: University of Texas Press, 2005);
    John M. Monteiro, *Blacks of the Land: Indian Slavery and the
    Origins of Colonial São Paulo*, trans. Barbara Weinstein and James
    P. Woodard (Cambridge; New York: Cambridge University Press, 2018);
    A. J. R. Russell-Wood, "Introduction: New Directions in Bandeirismo
    Studies in Colonial Brazil," *The Americas* 61, no. 3 (2005):
    353--71; Hal Langfur, *The Forbidden Lands: Colonial Identity,
    Frontier Violence, and the Persistence of Brazil's Eastern Indians,
    1750-1830* (Stanford: Stanford University Press, 2006). These body
    of literature reponds to the traditional *bandeirismo*
    historiography from the beginning of the 20^th^ century, which
    composed a nationalistic and epic narrative of intrepid explorers
    enlarging the boundaries of Brazil. Although mostly written in
    Portuguese, Richard Morse compiled and published some of the key
    texts. Richard M. Morse, ed., *The Bandeirantes: The Historical Role
    of the Brazilian Pathfinders* (New York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1965).

[^7]: Michel de Certeau, *The Practice of Everyday Life* (Berkeley:
    University of California Press, 1984); Henri Lefebvre, *The
    Production of Space* (Oxford: Wiley-Blackwell, 1991).

[^8]: Cláudia Damasceno Fonseca, *Arraiais e vilas d'el rei : espaco e
    poder nas Minas setecentistas* (Belo Horizonte: EDUFMG, 2011);
    Janaína Amado, "Região, Sertão, Nação," *Estudos Históricos* 8, no.
    15 (1995): 145--51.

[^9]: Pedro Taques de Almeida Paes Leme, *Nobiliarquia Paulistana
    Histórica e Genealógica*, ed. Afonso de E. Taunay (São Paulo:
    Editora Itatiaia Limitada; Editora da Universidade de São Paulo,
    1980); Luis Gonzaga Silva Leme, Genealogia Paulistana, 9 vols. (São
    Paulo: Duprat & Comp., 1903); Marta Maria Amato and Luis Gonzaga
    Silva Leme, Genealogia Paulistana, revised and extended edition, 13
    vols. (São Paulo: The author, 2002). In this article, I used the
    last edition by Maria Amato to create the database.

[^10]: This is a similar approach to Erbig Jr.' recent study on Native
    spatial practices in Rio de la Plata region, in which, by
    identifying patterns of geographic positioning using GIS, he sought
    recover meaning of Native actions. Cf. Jeffrey Alan Erbig Jr.,
    \"Where Caciques and Mapmakers Met: Border Making in 18th-Century
    South America\" (Chapel Hill: The University of North Carolina
    Press, 2020), 10.

[^11]: Arguing with Digital History working group, "Digital History and
    Argument," white paper, Roy Rosenzweig Center for History and New
    Media (November 13, 2017): 21-27.
    https://rrchnm.org/argument-white-paper/.

[^12]: Boxer, *The Portuguese Seaborne Empire, 1415-1825*; Russell-Wood,
    *The Portuguese Empire, 1514-1808: A World on the Move*.

[^13]: Bianca Carvalho Vieira and Marcelo Fischer Gramani, "Serra Do
    Mar: The Most 'Tormented' Relief in Brazil," in *Landscapes and
    Landforms of Brazil*, ed. Bianca Carvalho Vieira, André Augusto
    Rodrigues Salgado, and Leonardo José Cordeiro Santos (Dordrecht:
    Springer Netherlands, 2015), 285--97.

[^14]: Boxer, *The Portuguese Seaborne Empire, 1415-1825*; Russell-Wood,
    *The Portuguese Empire, 1514-1808: A World on the Move*.

[^15]: Frei Vicente do Salvador, *Historia do Brazil \[1627\]*, ed.
    Maria Lêda Oliveira (Rio de Janeiro: Odebrecht; São Paulo: Versal
    Editores, 2008), fl. 6v. Translated in Richard M. Morse, ed., *The
    Bandeirantes: The Historical Role of The Brazilian Pathfinders* (New
    York: Alfred A. Knopf, 1965), 8--9.

[^16]: "Diário da jornada que fez o Exmº Senhor Dom Pedro \[de Almeida e
    Portugal, conde de Assumar\] desde o Rio de Janeiro até a cidade de
    São Paulo, e desta até as Minas no ano de 1717." Ed. by Luis Camilo.
    In *Revista do Serviço do Patrimonio Histório e Artístico Nacional*,
    n. 3, 1939, 301.

[^17]: "Report of the governor Antonio Paes de Sande\..." Manuscript.
    Lisbon, January 8, 1693. Arquivo Histórico Ultramarino (AHU), São
    Paulo-Mendes Gouveia (SP-MG), box 10, doc. 1836.

[^18]: Warren Dean, *With Broadax and Firebrand: The Destruction of the
    Brazilian Atlantic Forest* (Berkeley: University of California
    Press, 1997); Rogerio Ribeiro de Oliviera and Verena Winiwarter,
    "Toiling in Paradise: Knowledge Acquisition in the Context of
    Colonial Agriculture in Brazil's Atlantic Forest," *Environment and
    History* 16, no. 4 (November 1, 2010): 483--508; Robert L. Carneiro,
    "Slash-and-Burn Agriculture: A Closer Look at Its Implications for
    Settlement Patterns," in *Men and Cultures: Selected Papers of the
    Fifth International Congress of Anthropological and Ethnological
    Sciences* (Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania Press, 1960),
    229--34.

[^19]: Sérgio Buarque de Holanda, "Movimentos da População em São Paulo
    no século XVIII," *Revista do Instituto de Estudos Brasileiros*, no.
    1 (1966): 55--111. James and others, based on the study of the
    coffee economy in the 19^th^ and 20^th^ centuries, called this
    phenomenon *hollow frontier* -- "a zone of declining productivity
    behind the advancing frontier." Emilio Casetti and Howard L.
    Gauthier, "A Formalization and Test of the 'Hollow Frontier'
    Hypothesis," *Economic Geography* 53, no. 1 (1977): 78; Preston E.
    James, *Latin America*, 4th ed. (New York: Odyssey Press, 1969);
    Harry W. Taylor, "São Paulo's Hollow Frontier," *Revista Geográfica*
    79 (December 1973): 149--66.

[^20]: Monteiro, *Blacks of the Land*, 28--36.

[^21]: Muriel Nazzari, *Disappearance of the Dowry: Women, Families, and
    Social Change in São Paulo, Brazil (1600-1900)* (Stanford: Stanford
    University Press, 1991), 3--11; Metcalf, *Family and Frontier in
    Colonial Brazil*, 93--94.

[^22]: Laura de Mello e Souza and Maria Fernanda Bicalho, *1680-1720: O
    Império Deste Mundo* (São Paulo: Companhia das Letras, 2000),
    23--24.

[^23]: In the 1640s, the average size of an expeditions was 18
    participants. John M. Monteiro, *São Paulo in the Seventeenth
    Century: Economy and Society* (Ph.D. Dissertation, University of
    Chicago, 1985), 419--20.

[^24]: The list of participants in the expedition was collected from the
    *Inventários e Testamentos*, vol. 13 (São Paulo: Typographia
    Piratininga, 1921), 347-367. For other expeditions, see Alfredo
    Ellis Jr., *Novas bandeiras e novos bandeirantes; Alguns paulistas
    dos séculos XVI e XVII*, Offprint of *Revista do Instituto Histórico
    e Geográphico Brasileiro* (Rio de Janeiro: J. Leite, 1922), 459--62.

[^25]: Nazzari, *Disappearance of the Dowry*, 1--39.

[^26]: These estimates are based on demographic data (total population
    per town and civil status distribution per age group) compiled in
    Angelo Alves Carrara, "A População Do Brasil, 1570-1700: Uma Revisão
    Historiográfica," *Tempo*, 2015; Maria Luiza Marcílio, *Crescimento
    demográfico e evolução agrária paulista, 1700-1836* (São Paulo:
    Editora Hucitec: Edusp, 2000).

[^27]: John M. Monteiro, "Escravidão indígena e o despovoamento da
    América Portuguesa," in *Brasil nas vésperas do mundo moderno*, ed.
    Francisco Faria Paulino (Lisboa: Comissão Nacional para as
    Comemorações dos Descobrimentos Portugueses, 1992), 137--67.

[^28]: For the mythical perceptions of Brazil, see Sérgio Buarque de
    Holanda, *Visão do Paraíso: Os motivos edênicos no descobrimento e
    colonização do Brasil* (São Paulo: Editora Brasiliense; Publifolha,
    2000); Theodoro Sampaio, "O sertão antes da conquista (século
    XVII)," *Revista do Instituto Histórico e Geográfico de São Paulo* 5
    (1901). On some of these expeditions, see Sérgio Buarque Holanda,
    "Metais e Pedras Preciosas," in *História Geral Da Civilização
    Brasileira: A Época Colonial. Administração, Economia e Sociedade.*,
    ed. Sérgio Buarque de Holanda, vol. II, tomo I (São Paulo: Difusão
    Européia do Livro, 1960), 259--310.

[^29]: "Report of the governor Antonio Paes de Sande\..."

[^30]: Idem.

[^31]: *Mameluco* refers to the offspring of Portuguese and Indians and
    was a common way of defining the population of the Luso-Brazilian
    settlements in São Paulo. Cf. Edmundo Zenha, *Mamelucos* (São Paulo:
    Emprêsa Gráfica da Revista dos Tribunais, 1970); Afonso de E.
    Taunay, *História Geral Das Bandeiras Paulistas*, vol. 1 (São Paulo:
    Typ. Ideal, H.L. Canton, 1924), 128--32. The recurrence of the term
    indicates the complex racial and ethnic makeup of colonial São
    Paulo, which counts with a strong Native influence and is
    characteristic of borderland societies. Notably, many expeditions
    leaders - and possibly most of the population in Luso-Brazilian
    settlements - came from a hybrid lineage. Natives were also active
    participants of these enterprises in the role of guides, pilots, and
    porters, and many of the techniques colonists used to rove the
    backlands originated in indigenous practices. Moreover, the *lingua
    geral*, a variation of Tupi language, was widely spoken in São
    Paulo. Cf. Sergio Buarque de Holanda, *Caminhos e Fronteiras* (Rio
    de Janeiro: José Olympio, 1957). Unfortunately, the genealogical
    records are elusive about the ethnic and racial origins of the
    people included in these writings

[^32]: Manoel Cardozo, "The Last Adventure of Fernão Dias Pais
    (1674-1681)," *The Hispanic American Historical Review* 26, no. 4
    (November 1946): 467--79; Manoel Cardozo, "Dom Rodrigo de
    Castel-Blanco and the Brazilian El Dorado, 1673-1682," *The
    Americas* 1, no. 2 (October 1944): 131--59; Boxer, *Golden Age of
    Brazil 1695-1750*, 35--36.

[^33]: Holanda, *Visão do Paraíso*.

[^34]: Carrara, "A População Do Brasil, 1570-1700."

[^35]: Monteiro, *São Paulo in the Seventeenth Century: Economy and
    Society*, 416--25.

[^36]: Bento Fernandes Furtado, "Notícias dos primeiros descobridores
    das primeiras minas do ouro pertencentes a estas Minas Gerais,
    pessoas mais assinaladas nestes empregos e dos mais memoráveis casos
    acontecidos desde os seus princípios." Manuscript. Minas Gerais, c.
    1750. Transcribed and published in Luciano Figueiredo and Maria
    Verônica Campos, eds., *Códice Costa Matoso: coleção das notícias
    dos primeiros descobrimentos das minas na América que fez o doutor
    Caetano da Costa Matoso sendo ouvidor-geral das do Ouro Preto, de
    que tomou posse em fevereiro de 1749, & vários papéis* (Belo
    Horizonte: Sistema Estadual de Planejamento, Fundação João Pinheiro,
    Centro de Estudos Históricos e Culturais, 1999), 169.

[^37]: Monteiro, *São Paulo in the Seventeenth Century: Economy and
    Society*, 421--23.

[^38]: Maria Monteiro Machado, "Duas gerações de caminhos pelos sertões:
    Fernão Dias Paes e Garcia Rodrigues Paes," in *Em terras lusas:
    Conflitos e fronteiras no Império português*, ed. Márcia Motta, José
    Vicente Serrão, and Marina Monteiro Machado, Coleção Terra (Vinhedo:
    Editora Horizonte, 2013), 23--45.

[^39]: "Petition of captain Bartolomeu Bueno da Silva and others to the
    king." Manuscript. January 13, 1720. AHU, SP-MG, box 2, doc. 148.

[^40]: Furtado, "Notícias dos primeiros descobridores\...", 171.

[^41]: For a non-exhaustive list of the land grants they requested, see
    Arquivo Público do Estado de São Paulo (AESP), Divisão de
    Manuscritos, *Sesmarias, Patentes, e Provisões -- Book 2 (1724-28)*,
    fl. 25v-26f, 28v-30f, and fl. 49v-51f. See also AHU, SP-MG, box 5,
    doc. 530. The reference to the "headwaters of the Paranapanema
    \[River\] which mines were discovered by Salvador Jorge \[Velho\]",
    Luis' father-in-law, appears in one of the few contemporary maps of
    the captaincy of São Paulo, the *Plano hidrográfico das bacias dos
    rios Paraná e Paraguai, abrangendo as regiões de São Paulo e Mato
    Grosso*, Manuscript map, 42.5cm x 59.5cm, c. 1700-1750. Arquivo
    Nacional (Brazil), ARC.023,04,019 -- Cartografia.

[^42]: *Documentos interessantes para História e Costumes de São Paulo*
    (DI). Vol. LI (São Paulo: Arquivo do Estado de São Paulo, 1930),
    238.

[^43]: For a list of the land grants, see Marina Lourdes Ritter, *As
    sesmarias do Paraná no século XVIII* (Curitiba: IHGEPR, 1980); São
    Paulo. Divisão de Arquivo do Estado, *Repertório das sesmarias* (São
    Paulo: A Divisão, 1944).

[^44]: Arquivo Municipal de Curitiba, "Tombo da Camara da Villa da
    Curytiba 1668 a 1694." Manuscript, fl. 53.

[^45]: Suely Roble Reis de Queiroz, "José de Góis e Morais: O Paulista
    Que Quase Comprou São Paulo," *Revista de História*, no. 86 (June
    1971); Ilana Blaj, "Agricultores e Comerciantes Em São Paulo Nos
    Inícios Do Século XVIII: O Processo de Sedimentação Da Elite
    Paulistana," *Revista Brasileira de História* 18, no. 36 (1998):
    281--96.

[^46]: Herbert Klein, "The Supply of Mules to Central Brazil: The
    Sorocaba Market, 1825-1880," *Agricultural History* 64, no. 4
    (1990): 1--25.

[^47]: As an outcome of the military conflicts in the first decade of
    the 18^th^ century, the monarchy elevated the status of São Paulo
    from town to city to appease the complaints of the inhabitants of
    São Paulo who felt that their privileges in the mining region were
    being disregarded in favor of outsiders. In 1709, the captaincy of
    São Vicente was thus renamed, and the seat of the governor was
    permanently transferred to the city. A new reorganization of the
    colony in 1720, to embitter the people of São Paulo again, made
    Minas Gerais independent from São Paulo, and in the following years,
    other regions were dismembered until the captaincy of São Paulo lost
    its autonomy in 1748. It remained under the jurisdiction of Rio de
    Janeiro until 1765, when a new governor was finally appointed to
    restore the captaincy. Cf. Beatriz Piccolotto Siqueira Bueno,
    "Dilatação dos confins: Caminhos, vilas e cidades na formação da
    Capitania de São Paulo (1532-1822)," *Anais do Museu Paulista (Nova
    série)* 17, no. 2 (July 2009). About the conflict between the people
    from São Paulo and the outsiders (the "*emboabas*"), see Manoel
    Cardozo, "The Guerra Dos Emboabas, Civil War in Minas Gerais,
    1708-1709," *The Hispanic American Historical Review* 22, no. 3
    (August 1942): 470--92. For an overview of the routes to the mining
    regions, see A. J. R. Russell-Wood, "Colonial Brazil: The Gold
    Cycle, c. 1690--1750," in *Mines of Silver and Gold in the
    Americas*, ed. Peter Bakewell. (Aldershot: Variorum, 1997), 555-558.

[^48]: Russell-Wood, "Colonial Brazil: The Gold Cycle, c. 1690--1750,"
    557.

[^49]: Published in Archivo do Estado de São Paulo. *Inventátios e
    testamentos*, vol. 35 (São Paulo: Typographia Piratininga, 1921),
    443-491.

[^50]: Afonso de E. Taunay, "Prefácio," in *Nobiliarquia Paulistana
    Histórica e Genealógica*, by Pedro Taques de Almeida Paes Leme, ed.
    Afonso de E. Taunay (São Paulo: Editora Itatiaia Limitada; Editora
    da Universidade de São Paulo, 1980), 11--36.

[^51]: Kenneth Maxwell, *Pombal, Paradox of the Enlightenment*
    (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 1995).

[^52]: Heloísa Liberalli Bellotto, *Autoridade e conflito no Brasil
    colonial: O governo do Morgado de Mateus em São Paulo, 1765-1775*
    (São Paulo: Alameda, 2007); Amilcar Torrão Filho, "O 'Milagre Da
    Onipotência' e a Dispersão Dos Vadios: Política Urbanizadora e
    Civilizadora Em São Paulo Na Administração Do Morgado de Mateus
    (1765-1775)," *Estudos Ibero-Americanos* XXXI, no. 1 (June 2005):
    145--65.

[^53]: Jaime Cortesão, *O Tratado de Madri*, 2 vols. (Brasilia: Senado
    Federal, 2002).

[^54]: Mario Clemente Ferreira, "O Mapa das Cortes e o Tratado de
    Madrid: A cartografia a serviço da diplomacia," *Varia Historia* 23,
    no. 37 (June 2007): 51--69.
