---
title: "Arguing with Digital History:"
weight: 1
subtitle: Patterns of Historical Interpretation
doi: http://thelinktothisarticlehere
author: 
- name: Stephen Robertson
  affiliation: George Mason University
  email: srober30@gmu.edu
- name: Lincoln A. Mullen
  affiliation: Roy Rosenzweig Center for History and New Media
  email: lincoln@lincolnmullen.com
citation:
- author: Robertson, Stephen, and Lincoln A. Mullen
  title: "Arguing with Digital History: Patterns of Historical Interpretation"
  journal: Journal of Social History
  year: 2021
  volume: 54
  issue: 4
  pages: 1005ff.
  doi: http://doi.org/10.1093/jsh/shab015
---

Digital history has only rarely created interpretative or argumentative
scholarship in the ways that currently define both the forms and the
ends of disciplinary practices of research. In terms of form, digital
historians have only rarely published the interpretative (rather than
methodological) journal articles or monographs that are taken as the
main medium of research in the discipline. Perhaps this is not
surprising, given that the possibilities of digital media have spurred
digital historians to creativity in coming up with new forms of
scholarship.

But form leads to substance. Whatever their shortcomings, the journal
article and the monograph excel at disciplining historians' research so
that they produce argumentative scholarship that advances new
understandings and interpretations of a particular field of study. That
is the end to which most conventional historical research points.
Digital history's creativity with form has not been matched by a
corresponding impact on how historical fields of study understand the
past.[^1] At times some digital historians have wondered whether their
methodologically-defined field ought to be making more of an
interpretative impact. More often, they have celebrated---or at least
justified---their freedom from being constrained to pursue the same end
as other historians. Certainly, digital history has spurred a great deal
of methodological discussion and has brought historical knowledge to
public audiences and to K-12 teachers, students, and families. Each of
these is an end worth pursuing.

But it is our view that digital history should---and can---make more of
an impact on historical knowledge within specific fields. Historical
interpretations and arguments are not the only ends that digital history
should pursue, but they are *an* end that digital history should pursue.
For several years we have been pursuing a line of work in which we have
sought to encourage and enable other digital historians to pursue such
argumentative and interpretative scholarship. The outcomes have included
an Andrew W. Mellon Foundation--funded workshop which wrote a white
paper on historical argumentation in digital history; a journal that
publishes discipline-specific arguments and interpretations that come
out of digital history projects in progress; and the special section in
this journal, also the product of a Mellon-funded workshop bringing
together early career historians and the editors of this journal; and a
website hosted by the Roy Rosenzweig Center for History and New Media in
which authors of noteworthy journal articles, including the two articles
that appear in this special section, annotate the process by which they
developed their historical arguments.

But at the same time, other historians have been slowly amassing a body
of interpretative work based on digital history. In this introduction to
the special section, we briefly offer an overview of the reasons that
digital historians have not in the main pursued interpretative
scholarship that makes field-specific arguments. Then we turn to an
overview of places where digital historians have made such arguments,
including in this special section, and seek to show the patterns of
argumentation that those articles have developed.

Our contention is quite simple. Conventional historians have many models
of scholarship in forms that pursue the end of historical argumentation.
Digital historians have many models of scholarship in forms that
encourage other ends, but few models of argument-driven digital history,
and so both the option and means to pursue historical interpretation as
a primary end are less obvious to those joining the field. In this
article, we seek to show how other digital historians have pursued
digital scholarship which is methodologically innovative but which also
advances historical interpretations. By showing the patterns of
argumentation latent in that scholarship, we seek to encourage other
digital historians to emulate those patterns and create more
interpretative scholarship.

## Why have digital historians not made arguments?

Why digital history has not had the impact on field-specific arguments
in history---an impact on the historiography---remains something of a
puzzle. Certainly, there has been no shortage of claims by digital
historians that they *would* have such an impact.

However a large proportion of digital historians have instead
concentrated on speaking directly to or with public audiences. In part
that reflects the orientation of many early digital historians toward
public history and the influence of the wealth of resulting models for
such scholarship that have been created.[^2] At the same time, digital
historians in other fields have made their work publicly available to
nonacademic audiences to a greater extent than their non-digital
colleagues. The products of digital research and analysis undertaken
prior to the creation of historical interpretation can be accessible
online to a far greater extent than is the case with analog history.
Historical sources that have been collected and digitized, data created
from sources, visualizations such as maps created to explore sources and
data can all be made shared with the public apart from any scholarly
argument and interpretation and without the constraints of scholarly
publication. (We ourselves have taken this approach with digital
research, most notably *Digital Harlem* in the case of Stephen Robertson
and *America's Public Bible* in the case of Lincoln Mullen.)
Many---though not all---digital historians find audiences which are far
larger than the audience of academic historians in a particular field,
and also feel that making historical resources available for open use is
more rewarding and most valuable to society than the contribution of
another journal article or monograph. In the past, such activity was
recognized as scholarship; with his typical prescience, Roy Rosenzweig
recognized almost twenty years ago that the digital era would unsettle
the relationship between historians and archival work and force us to
ask, "Should the work of collecting, organizing, editing and preserving
of primary sources receive the same kind of recognition and respect that
it did in the earlier days of the profession?"[^3] The re-emergent
digital forms of that practice among historians has slowly gained
institutional and professional recognition even if not the status of
scholarship, in part because of its public audience, creating a
disincentive to take the additional step to develop a scholarly argument
interpreting that material. Creating digital historical resources is
also labor intensive, especially at scale, so digital historians who
undertake it are left little time to themselves build such an argument.

Moreover, some of the exploratory digital analyses and visualizations
made public were not conceived to be developed into argument-driven
scholarship. Reflecting the process of engagement with digital tools,
the purpose was finding out what digital tools could do, to experiment.
Tom Scheinfeldt succinctly articulated that approach in a blog post in
2010, arguing that only after "tool building experimentation and
description" would digital tools be sufficiently articulated and
phenomena sufficiently described" for arguments to be made."[^4] These
experiments typically focused on working with data, using a digital tool
to identify features and patterns in those sources, rather than
answering questions or organizing the results into an overarching
argument. An exemplary example is Robert Nelson's *Mining the Dispatch*,
which demonstrates the results of topic modeling "to uncover categories
and discover patterns" in "the topics that dominated the news during the
Civil War in the capital of the Confederacy's newspaper of record," the
Richmond *Daily Dispatch*.[^5] Nelson's project includes an introduction
describing the digital tool he is using and a brief analysis of one of
the topics he identified, and a section that provides an overview of
most of the topics, grouped as themes, and a page for each topic with
charts and exemplary articles that include that topic.

In cases where public digital historical resources have become the bases
of scholarly arguments, they had an indirect impact, subsumed in
narrative. One need look no further than one of the earliest digital
history projects: *The Valley of the Shadow* has been enormously
influential as a digital collection.[^6] The sources the site contains
form the basis ofEdward Ayers's award-winning books *In the Presence of
Mine Enemies* and *The Thin Light of Freedom*.[^7] While a page in the
front matter of the first volume and a mention in the preface of the
second volume identifies the books as a part of *The Valley of Shadow*
project and points readers to the site, the books themselves offer a
narrative history that shows no indication of its digital roots or
argument based on digital methods. To take another example: Jane
Kamensky's *The Exchange Artist* is a contribution to the history of the
early American republic, and most scholars recognize its contributions
to craft within its narrative and prose style, following on Kamensky and
Lepore's work of historical fiction, *Blindspot*. But *The Exchange
Artist* also features plates of a 3D reconstruction of Boston's Exchange
Coffee House, which in turn informs the prose and the analysis. Again,
the book does not present itself as a work of digital history, but it is
one.[^8]

It is also the case that argument-driven scholarship that is explicitly
based on digital history is not always visible as such when the emphasis
is on interpretation rather than on method. An element of "digital
history" and especially "digital humanities" defines itself in an
institutional sense by drawing attention to the digital over against the
conventional. Scholarship in DH draws attention when there is something
about its approach or method that appeals across the typical boundaries
of a field or discipline. A kind of map, or maybe an approach to text
analysis, might draw the attention of a twentieth-century U.S.
historian, an Ottomanist, and a literary scholar for its contribution to
method. But if the work is pitched primarily as a contribution to
Ottoman history, then the U.S. historian is unlikely to pay it much
attention, and vice versa. Put differently, what draws the interest of
attendees at DHSI or the DH conference is very different than what draws
the attention of attendees at the Organization of American Historians or
the Council on Latin American History.

One thing, however, is clear. The problem with digital history's impact
on specific historical fields is no longer that editors in those fields
are unwilling to publish such research. In recent years, leading
journals such as the *American Historical Review,* the *Journal of
American History*, the *Journal of Social History*, *Law and History
Review* and other journals below have shown that they are willing and
even eager to publish scholarship in these fields, although not always
in the form, or at least with the discussion of method, digital
historians favor. If anything, digital history has a premium at those
journals, so long as it makes an argument recognizable as a contribution
to disciplinary scholarship.

It is our contention that part of the reason this scholarship has not
developed is because digital historians lack models for the kinds of
work they can, and likely should, be doing. To that end, we have
presented some models for how digital historians can connect their
unique methodologies to historical interpretation.

## Workshopping Arguments

A white paper produced by participants in a workshop we convened,
"Digital History and Argument," provides a guide to the argumentative
structures and work of digital collections, digital public history,
digital methodological work, computational digital history and
visualizations.[^9] The twenty-seven authors of the white paper
concluded that most forms of digital history have advanced only implicit
historical arguments. Digital collections, on the one hand, are
primarily about gathering and publishing primary sources. Scholars make
an implicit argument by selecting, organizing, categorizing and
describing sources, but they do not explicitly articulate those
arguments or address their implications for how their topic is
understood by other scholars. The discussion of digital methodologies,
on the other hand, explains and develops new ways for analyzing
historical sources, but again, those methods are not the interpretations
themselves. Because digital public history is created both for public
audiences and often in collaboration with those communities, it
primarily engages in a conversation with the public rather than with
other scholars, and it prefers a form of implicit interpretation rather
than explicit argumentation. Computational digital history and digital
history visualizations are more amenable to explicit argument, as they
both create a broad view of a set of sources that highlights patterns
that can be interpreted. Word frequency analysis, topic modelling and
word-embedded modeling identify quantitative patterns in textual data,
while centrality and betweenness calculations identify quantitative
patterns in networks. Maps and network visualizations identify spatial
patterns in data. But projects involving both forms of digital history
often present those quantitative analyses and visualizations with little
interpretation. By contrast the argumentative interpretation that
appears in the pages of scholarly historical journals such as the
*Journal of Social History* makes explicit its claims, evidence, logic
and engagement with other scholarship. Examining why there are so few
examples of digital history that make such explicit arguments, the
authors of the white paper concluded that scholars lack conceptual
models of how to apply digital methods to historical questions.

To encourage more argument-driven digital history we collaborated with
the Andrew W. Mellon Foundation to organize a series of workshops to
support authors in the process of writing, peer review and publication.
The two articles that appear in this special issue/section are the
result of that process.[^10] To extend the utility of these articles, we
also created a site, *Models of argument-driven digital history*,
hosting a freely available version of the articles annotated to serve as
models of how to conceive and construct interpretations and arguments
using digital history methods and materials. When the changed
circumstances of the pandemic curtailed plans to discuss the process and
models in a session at the AHA annual meeting, we moved instead to
expand the site with eight additional articles, published scholarship
that provides successful models of argument-driven digital history.

## Patterns of Argument-Driven Digital History

In this section we analyze a set of articles which have made
field-specific arguments on the basis of digital historical work. In
doing so, we seek to show two things. First, it is indeed entirely
possible for digital historians to make significant arguments in their
historical fields. However, as we previously mentioned, such work often
does not get marked as digital history because its contributions are
interpretative rather than methodological, and because it is published
in journals for specific fields rather than in DH journals. So we have
attempted to read broadly across fields other than our own to identify
examples of digital historical arguments, though of course we have
undoubtedly missed many worthy examples in other fields or languages
other than English. Second, we have tried to read these articles to show
how they can serve as models for other historians to make similar
arguments. Often times the discipline advances when specific articles
provide models for how other historians can offer new interpretations:
one thinks of Robert Darnton's "The Great Cat Massacre" or Joan Scott's
"Gender: A Useful Category of Analysis."[^11] While perhaps none of
these articles rises to the level of those celebrated works of
scholarship, they are useful models for digital historians seeking to
make arguments in different fields on the basis of similar kinds of
sources and methods.

Published digital history that successfully makes explicit arguments
shares several broad structures, with variations associated with
different digital methods. The selection of evidence with which the
process of historical argument begins is framed more broadly in digital
history, including fragmentary sources not amenable to close reading and
sets of sources expanded in scale and comprehensiveness. That foundation
supports arguments centrally concerned with context, and that develop by
moving across scales, often beginning with the broadest picture. (Here
digital history differs from conventional historical arguments, which
tend to move from the particular to its context). Tim Hitchcock has
described that as a "data-first" approach, an argument structured to
"purposefully presents a comprehensive set of data, on the basis of
which the reader is guided to a specific conclusion" rather than taking
" the form of a claim or argument, evidenced through a narrow selection
of precisely relevant data."[^12] Digital methods provide an empirically
grounded picture of the typical and representative in contrast to
outliers, allowing for a systematic visual or quantitative examination
of patterns through correlation, resemblance, or proximity. The sources
selected through this process as the most important are the subject of
close reading to address interpretive questions that the digital methods
being used cannot answer, reengaging with the complexities of sources
necessarily simplified to create data.

The forms of digital history most amenable to explicit disciplinary
arguments are visualizations of data such as maps, networks and 3D
models, and computational analysis of data. Far from mutually exclusive,
those forms are often used in combination, with the results of network
visualizations analyzed using algorithms and computational text analysis
presented as maps and network graphs.

Digital historians developing arguments based on spatial visualizations
are building on historians' long-standing use of mapping as a conceptual
framework, albeit from a metaphorical perspective: the use of "the idiom
of borders and boundaries, frontiers and crossroads, centers and
margins," as Karen Haluttunen put it.[^13] Moreover, maps conveying
information are a longstanding feature of historical publications,
although generally they are limited to identifying locations. Digital
history spatial visualizations by contrast show data in a spatial
context, expanding the scale of information being conveyed,
incorporating fragmentary sources, and combining layers of different
kinds of sources. In employing qualitative sources and not relying on
quantitative analyses, these visualizations differ from mapping using
Historical GIS. In "Seeing Emancipation: Scale and Freedom in the
American South," Edward Ayers and Scott Nesbit mapped locations and
movements of Union troops compiled by Frederick Dyer, and combined them
with locations of categories of what they defined as "emancipation
events" gleaned from the Official Records of the War of the Rebellion,
together with several newspapers and diaries. This map put together the
pieces of the "vast, distended and chaotic" process of emancipation that
unfolded within shifting boundaries and at an uneven pace" to provide a
picture that showed "the patterns, proportions and timing of
emancipation," and "how actions overlap, penetrate, and conflict with
each other."[^14] Ayers and Nesbit progressively shift the scale of
their analysis, selecting first the entire Civil War South in Summer
1864 to show how "military movements overlay legal and demographic
geographies to create a complex terrain for emancipation," then
narrowing the focus to Virginia to highlight "a loose coordination
between enslaved men and women fleeing slavery and the paths of large
armies," switching to a narrative that shows "armies were unreliable
vehicles for emancipation, bringing heartbreak as well as
liberation."[^15]

Because the visualization which Ayers and Nesbit interpreted focused on
the distribution and proximity of events, it mapped them on a simple
base layer showing state boundaries and railroad lines. Scholars focused
on cities have created more detailed base layers as a context for other
data, so the relationship between specific places and events and
individuals located there can be analyzed, in addition to their
proximity and distribution. For example, Nicholas Terpstra and Colin
Rose, with a team of collaborators, created DECIMA, which visualized
census data from early modern Florence on an aerial view of the city,
the Buonsignori map of 1584. Scholars then used that historical GIS as
the basis for visualizing other documents, or as Terpstra puts it, they
took DECIMA into the archives to "co-relate its cartographic and
statistical abstraction \... to more long-standing relational ways of
understanding space and place that emerge from other documents."[^16] In
"Locating the sex trade in the early modern city," Terpstra first
analyzed "bureaucratic sources that set out regulatory ambitions" to
identify three phases in approaches to regulating prostitution, then put
those sources in the spatial context provided by DECIMA that
"clarif\[ied\] socioeconomic contexts."[^17] Terpstra constructs his
interpretation as a series of "three linked inquiries," visualizations
of "where prostitutes lived and worked, what prosecutions they faced
most often, and what economic conditions marked their neighbourhoods."
Each shows "just how little of urban life was truly or effectively
regulated: higher license fees allowed prostitutes to remain in
restricted areas; prosecutions focused on concerns around sound not more
general violations and moral concerns; and rather than being pushed to
nooks, crannies and alleys, prostitutes lived and worked in inner
suburbs, away from significant public buildings and the ritual center,
in areas marked by transience and connected to outside world from which
prostitutes came.[^18]

Catherine Clarke makes a related form of argument in "Place, identity
and performance," using a detailed map of medieval Swansea to trace the
routes of nine witnesses to the hanging of William Cragh and his
apparently miraculous revival. As with other spatial visualizations,
this analysis places the witnesses' statements in their "specific
spatial context," but with a focus on movement not simply location.[^19]
Clarke briefly outlines the itineraries of each witness, and uses them
as "the basis for a more discursive interpretation of place and identity
in medieval Swansea" that reveals details of the ways in which "spaces
carried distinctive (and often malleable) meanings for different
communities and individuals, borders and boundaries were inscribed both
visibly and invisibly throughout the town, and inhabitants were adept at
shaping the ways in which they were perceived by others through their
own spatial practices."[^20] In this interpretation, Clarke moves beyond
the visualization, unpacking the evidence supporting where witnesses are
visualized on the map, drawing on additional sources to establish the
particular meaning of places for different groups, highlighting where
individuals do not go, and identifying the use of a proxy to extend
individuals' range of spatial movement and sphere of agency.

This form of argument in which individuals are placed into a digital
model of a space and their movements analyzed has also been used in
relation to 3D reconstructions. In "Reconsidering Poor Law Institutions
by Virtually Reconstructing and Re-Viewing an Eighteenth-Century
Workhouse,," Susannah Ottaway and Austin Mason created a model of the
House of Industry at Gressenhall, Norfolk, that allowed "human-scale
exploration using a first person controller in the mode of commercial
video games" that they used as a "virtual 'stage' for \[their\]
historical actors."[^21] The structure of their argument examines the
features of the building and lines modeling the routes of the poor and
guardians as they made their way to workrooms, dining spaces, the
schoolroom and committee room and attendant spaces in relation to
archival documents. Ottaway and Mason show that the building reinforced
paupers ease of movement in and out of the workhouse and authorized the
role and power of the guardians articulated in documents. By contrast,
the building facilitated a mixing of different categories of the poor at
odds with the commitment to segregation of groups for which the
workhouse was intended to have discrete functions. This combination
reveals that the building embodied how "new ambitions around policing
were actively restrained by the expectations and actions of the poor in
the last decades of the eighteenth century."[^22]

In a further form of argument centered on movement, instead of placing
individuals in a reconstructed spatial context, Harmony Bench and Kate
Elswit, in their "Katherine Dunham's Global Method and the Embodied
Politics of Dance's Everyday," quantify travel and examine it at
multiple scales. By using performance contracts, receipt books, personal
logs and activity diaries, programs, newspaper clippings, and personal
and professional correspondence to reconstruct where Dunham was every
day between January, 1 1950 and December 31, 1953, they generated an
analysis "counter to dominant historical approaches that take a midfield
view to build broad narratives through a small set of exemplary moments,
anecdotally illustrating an argument."[^23] Their mapping of travel
between locations and timeline of the duration of stays reveal patterns
in touring that "rebalance the geography of Dunham scholarship,"
revealing the importance of cities beyond those featured in existing
scholarship and of nightclubs as performance venues, new contexts in
which to interpret her choreographic and ethnographic work. Bench and
Elswit then turn to close reading to highlight the embodied labor
involved in the movement that a visualization of points connected by
lines helps appear seamless. They use the paradigm of friction to
elaborate the difficulties Dunham encountered moving, including
available modes of transportation, the logistics of crossing borders,
racial restrictions on accommodations, and the constant need to exchange
currencies. Those pressures wore not only on Dunham's mobility, but on
her body. Granular data that reveal Dunham performing or rehearsing 74%
of the days in the data, and traveling for more than half of the
remaining time, directs attention to the wear and tear on Dunham's body
and the fatigue and physical complaints that she wrote about.

Leo Barleta's article in this special issue, "Spatial Genealogies
Mobility, Settlement, and Empire-Building in the Brazilian Backlands,
1650--1800," takes a different approach to patterns of movement,
visualizing journeys as a network of relationships that highlights that
kinship not geography or infrastructure was key to mobility.[^24] His
sources are genealogical compilations, containing thousands of brief
biographies, fragmentary sources mined for places of birth and marriage
that could be used to trace mobility.[^25] Counter to arguments that
emphasize the exceptionality of the journeys of intrepid explorers,
Barleta's visualizations highlight the repetition and routinization of
movement between coast and interior, with the thickness of the lines
linking points indicating the volume of traffic (which Bench and Elswit
visualized as a timeline). The way that the lines fill the resulting
image visually conveys his argument that the space was connected and
made cohesive through family ties, that "these colonists' sustained
mobility wove together an otherwise fragmented territory." To elaborate
the texture and social aspects of the lives captured in these patterns,
Barleta turns to snippets of an individual life story, constructed from
other sources.

Networks, like maps, have been widely used metaphorically by historians
as a conceptual framework, with the language of networks applied, as
Ahnert et al note, to "communities of practitioners, the dissemination
of ideas, or the relationship between certain texts, images or
artifacts."[^26] Digital historians' network visualizations show
subjects in the context of relationships, often with a secondary use of
computational measures to identify those highly connected and those most
important to the structure of the network for closer analysis. Network
graphs, unlike maps, generally rely on a single kind of source, which
limits the scope of the arguments derived from this method relative to
the combination of sources typical of historical interpretations.

Scholars involved in the *Mapping the Republic of Letters* project
initially used map-based visualizations of early modern correspondence
networks, in a variation of the approach taken by Barleta. Caroline
Winterer drew on such a visualization, with locations sized for the
number of letters sent there, in "Where is America in the Republic of
Letters?" to "reveal the hidden structures and conditions that nourished
the growth of the republic of letters in the early modern period and the
causes of its transformation in the nineteenth century," and provide a
new context for that intellectual network and British America's place in
it.[^27] England, and zooming in, London, appear as the destination of
most of the correspondence from British America, placing it, rather than
the broader Atlantic World, at the center of the colonies' intellectual
world. Visualization also established the distinctives of Benjamin
Franklin's correspondence lay in "the massive scale of his letter
network, its languages, and the role he played in his network \[of
connecting other people\]."[^28] Winterer highlighted that map-based
visualizations were less helpful in understanding the nature of British
America's place in the network, in particular whether the colonies were
peripheries of London. Those "cartographic representations of
intellectual networks" emphasized geographical relationships, the
closeness and centrality of correspondents in terms of their location,
at the expense of other features such as the number of letters they
exchanged. What was needed was a network graph to "represent
intellectual relationships in non-cartographic ways, pushing people
further or closer depending on how many letters they exchanged."[^29]
Lacking that tool, Winterer turned to other sources to characterize
relationships revealed in visualizations. The map-based networks thus
play a limited role in her argument.[^30]

Arguments based on the network graphs not available to Winterer employ a
different structure of argument that incorporates a secondary use of
computational analysis of the visualization to identify the elements
most important to connecting the network, in addition to those with the
most connections that can be seen visually at the center of network
graphs. Robert Morrisey created a network created from marriage and
baptismal records to understand the function over time of marriages
between French men and Native American women in Illinois country in the
early eighteenth century and "the communities and identities they
sometimes created."[^31] His argument is framed in terms of putting the
individuals and families studied by other scholars in the context of
larger networks and across time, to ask questions about their place and
who were the most important members of those networks.[^32] Those
sources provided a whole network picture, as Jesuits required each child
baptised in the Illinois country to have both a godmother and a
godfather.[^33] He develops his argument through a series of network
visualizations for two time periods, from which he identifies highly
connected individuals for close analysis. In the first period the highly
connected can be relatively easily seen in a graph of godparents and
marriages, and a graph limited to godmothers, with directional links
from godmother to parents. The later period produces a much denser graph
not so easily read visually: Morrissey adds labels to variations of the
graph identifying two categories of highly connected individuals, Native
women and a newly prominent group, French women. He finds clear patterns
in those networks; the most highly connected men and women in the
network were those most oriented toward the agrarian life considered
French. To more clearly see the social prominence and influence of
leading families he switches to computational measures of centrality,
the total number of connections and betweenness score (how many people
are connected through a certain individual) combined with quantitative
data about the land they had under cultivation and their household size.
Morrissey presents that evidence both as a table and layers it on to the
network graph, showing only those families, with the size of each node
reflecting the amount of land they had under cultivation. That analysis
confirms the visible patterns of a kinship ties exerting pressure toward
French agrarian cultures, a picture very different from a historiography
focused on mixed race fur trade marriages "rooted in an indigenous
framework and an indigenous sphere."[^34]

Network graphs created from more fragmentary sources, with more
multi-faceted structures, produce variations on the structure of
argument employed by Morrissey. Maeve Kane employs network analysis to
make meaning from sources difficult to analyze with other methods, two
credit account books that documented indigenous kinship and social ties
in the course of recording purchases, debts, and payments.[^35] Whereas
the central figures in Morrisey's network can be seen in the graphs,
giving computational measures a limited role in his argument, Kane's
argument centers on differing relationships between the highly connected
and those with high betweenness who provided the structure of the
networks she created. To make that pattern visible on the graph, Kane
sized the nodes representing individuals based on their betweenness
score. In the Iroquois network highly connected men had connections
often unconnected to others in the network, whereas women served as the
central connections through their communities, and bridged otherwise
unconnected tribal subnetworks, binding the network together. Munsee
women in the other network are much less influential on average and
function less frequently as bridges or hubs, in part because of "the
structure of the network, which features a large central component with
few subcommunities to be bridged."[^36] Alongside this argument about
the nature of the network, Kane develops a second strand of argument
that uses digital analysis to address context in the sense of
considering the nature of sources from which evidence of lived
experience is drawn, not just in the sense of placing fragmentary
evidence in a broader picture. In comparison to Morrissey's marriage and
baptismal records, Kane argues the account books reveal only a partial
network, the kinship relationships "made visible to settlers and the
ways in which colonialism shaped the perception of Indigenous social
ties."[^37] In terms of this argument, the structure of the second
network suggests that the trader "had fuller knowledge of connections
between his Munsee customers, or at least more frequently observed
connections between them than did the other trader," as a result of the
Munsee "being incorporated more fully into settler colonial economic
structures of debt and day labor."[^38] Kane concludes that "Indigenous
women's supposed declining status and influence under colonialism may
therefore be as much part of the colonial archival process as a product
of colonial restructuring of lived experience."[^39]

Working with a similarly fragmentary set of sources, but one containing
a greater variety of relationships than account transactions, and
seeking to understand the resilience of a network as well as its
structure, Ruth Ahnert and Sebastian Ahnert developed an argument that
made more extensive use of computational measurements to create a more
multifaceted picture of a network. Their "Protestant Letter Networks in
the Reign of Mary I: A Quantitative Approach," analyzed a network graph
of epistolary data to explore an underground community during a period
of intense persecution.[^40] In addition to the relationship of sender
and recipient used by Winterer and Edelstein and Kassabova, Ahnert and
Ahnert created data about further relationships mentioned in the
correspondence that linked the community: requested links; implied
links; reported links; messenger links; spousal links; and other family
links. These additional features provide the basis for finding features
of the network not visible in the whole network graph, which confirms
the importance of the martyrs as hubs in the community. Plotting the
taxonomy of links identifies a large group of people who are highly
connected despite sending or receiving relatively few letters. To
understand the role of such individuals in the network, they used
computational measures to quantify their connectedness: measurements of
betweenness and of eigenvector centrality (how many well connected
individuals an individual is adjacent to in the network) produced high
scores for figures not considered important in previous interpretations.
These men, and most surprisingly women, provided the infrastructure of
the network, by carrying letters and delivering financial support. To
bring this pattern further into focus, "to identify general rules for
the overall structure and function of the network," Ahnert and Ahnert
next developed quantitative criteria to establish categories of roles in
the network, grouping them into three categories of 'leader,' three
categories of network 'sustainer' (including financial supporters and
letter couriers), and a peripheral figure.[^41] The final step in the
argument is a case study to validate and nuance the macro-perspective. A
concluding temporal examination of the network highlights that it
endured a systematic attack that removed fourteen of the twenty most
central individuals thanks to the survival of lesser known figures who
provided its infrastructural backbone.

Rachel Midura's article in this special issue, "Itinerating Europe:
Early Modern Spatial Networks in Printed Itineraries, 1545--1700," uses
networks to analyze itineraries, another fragmentary source that cannot
be effectively analyzed with close reading. As spatial sources, mapping
might seem to be the appropriate form of visualization, but itineraries
presented "presented cities as semi-spatial, abstract concepts and
connections."[^42] Midura uses network models to "bridge the gap between
textual sources and cartographic representations, acknowledging the
impact of real geography, but not assuming its primacy in the inclusion,
modification, and ordering of routes."[^43] The abstract space of the
network is a better fit with these sources than the geographical space
of the map, preserving "the elements of hierarchy, directionality, and
centrality conveyed by the original itinerary format."[^44] Reading
itineraries as "a collective corpus," Midura created a network that
placed routes in context, allowing her to visually and quantitatively
identify anomalies, "prompting further inquiry into notable presences
and absences," and to demonstrate long term trends.[^45] As Midura
points out in the annotated version of the article, the structure of the
argument "relies on a spectrum of interpretations and visualizations,
matching the approach to the question being asked in each section."[^46]
The relative importance of cities within the itinerary corpus is first
analyzed visually by examining the number of connections to locations in
the whole network, and then filtering out of the network those locations
with the fewest connections. Following the structure of argument common
to network graph analysis, Midura turns to centrality metrics for a more
nuanced approach, calculating both betweenness and eigenvector scores.
The results are visualized on a map, to guide the analysis in the
direction of real journeys, as each measure highlights a different
feature of the routes: their inclusion of pilgrimage routes; and the
structuring effect of the mountain passes. However, adding a temporal
dimension, moving to a dynamic network model, reveals that both
inherited pilgrimage and mercantile routes "played a diminishing
structural role in the overall conceptual network."[^47] The life of a
route was based on the period of its active publication in itineraries;
analysis of route data and close reading identifies four clear periods,
which are refined by creating a dynamic network model and extracting
static networks to represent slices of time. Again, Mildura applies
filters to somewhat simplify the network graph to make the larger
patterns, so it includes only routes that appear across multiple authors
and locations with at least two connections. While it excludes
information, as Midura notes in an annotation, the filtered network
still "includes a great deal more information than would be possible in
a traditional selection of case-studies."[^48] Tracing the changes in
the network, Midura finds the most dramatic shift near the end of the
period, when "the cities included, the types of connections between
them, and the overall structure of the conceived European systems of
communication, travel, and exchange were altered."[^49]

Digital historians developing arguments based on computational text
analysis lack an existing conceptual framework on which to build of the
kind that exists for spatial visualizations and network graphs. The
labels 'distant reading' and 'machine reading' suggests a relationship
between computational text analysis and 'close reading,' the approach
generally taken in humanities research. However, where digital maps and
network graphs visualize data related to the concepts historians have
used metaphorically, the results of computational text analysis have no
such connection with close reading. The creation of data fragments text
into words, with little or no context depending on how many consecutive
words are grouped together. Since context is central to determining the
meaning of words, the patterns found in that quantitative data, whether
presented in charts, maps or networks, in the first instance are not
related to meaning. Text analysis thus relies more heavily than other
digital methods on close reading to connect pattern with meaning.[^50]
As a result, this method is generally used to examine large collections
of texts - more material than an individual could analyze with close
reading.

One result of beginning with large datasets has been arguments focused
on texts as objects of study, which begin with "a corpus looking for a
question," and identify broad patterns without pursuing close reading to
interpret those patterns. Tim Hitchcock and William Turkel used word
counts of the *Old Bailey Proceedings* to examine its use as evidence of
courtroom procedure, which assumes the length of trial reports reflects
court business.[^51] However, those arguments used a combination of
close reading and statistical sampling, which offer only a fragmentary
understanding of the precise character of the *Proceedings*. Hitchcock
and Turkel present a more comprehensive and detailed picture of the
*Proceedings* as a source through three lenses, each sorting the text on
a different basis. They begin by examining the *Proceedings* as a
"single massive text object," presented as a chart of words per year and
trials per year. Read in relation to the existing literature, the chart
generally fits pictures of the eighteenth century, but is at odds with
those of the nineteenth century, pointing to a series of specific
moments that deserve further investigation. Shifting to an analysis of
the *Proceedings* as a collection of trials, Hitchcock and Turkel
analyze log charts that show spasmodic changes in distribution of
eighteenth-century trial lengths that indicate that they changed in
response to factors outside court business. As such, they have limited
value as evidence for the rise of the adversarial trial. By contrast,
nineteenth-century trials show a gradual pattern of change and
consistent pattern of reporting that suggests that they do reflect
courtroom practice, and fit arguments about the rise of plea-bargaining
in this period. Hitchcock and Turkel then examine specific factors
associated with trials reported at different lengths: the seriousness of
the offense; the verdict; and conviction rates. That quantitative
analysis is possible because the digital text of the *Proceedings* is
marked up with tags that identify information about those factors. That
analysis confirms the two different regimes of trial reporting and the
impact of the rise of plea bargaining. The explanations for that change
require pairing of text mining with close reading and archival research
beyond the scope of the article.

A similar focus on identifying broad patterns shapes arguments that use
topic modeling, the creation of groups of frequently collocated words,
to identify some of the meaning of texts. Sharon Block and David Newman
use a combination of word frequency and topic modeling of tens of
thousands of historical abstracts "to recognize basic patterns" in "what
place does women's history have in the field at large and what kind of
subjects are included within women's history; where in various regional
histories does women's history most frequently appear; when do
publications on women's history increase or decrease in numbers as well
as when, chronologically, women's historians most focus their
efforts."[^52] The argument proceeds through three scales of analysis,
calculating the amount of women's history in all the abstracts, and then
using topic modeling to identify the subject areas in abstracts
identified as women's history, concluding with a case study of one
theme, the history of sexuality, with quantitative evidence of patterns
presented in charts and tables. The broad pattern in which "different
thematic emphases predominate in various regional specialties within
women's history" is echoed in the case study (5 of the 40 topics, 9% of
women's history abstracts), in which the amount and content related to
sexuality varies more by region than chronology. Jo Guldi makes similar
use of topic modeling to establish broad patterns in the parliamentary
debates of Hansard---"new tensions and turning points that characterized
the uptake of infrastructure over the longue durée.\"[^53] In a model of
500 topics, a level that returned an overview of parliamentary business,
Guldi looked for "words about technology, infrastructure, and the built
environment, hoping to find patterns that replicate, enhance, or nuance
the guns-maps-and steel thesis of earlier scholars."[^54] She chose a
subset of topics and analyzed them as dynamic topic models, comparing
the words and their relative ranking in the topic in different decades
in tables shaded to highlight patterns. These topic models point to
"significant contexts," "highlighting moments of shifting technology,
institutional alignments, and political structures in the
landscape."[^55]

A second strand of computational textual analysis approaches large
datasets with specific questions, and develops arguments that extend to
close reading. Digital historians analyzing subjects that are denoted
with proper nouns - people, places, organizations, products - have
constructed arguments about those subjects based on word frequency. Anne
Helmreich, Tim Hitchcock, and William Turkel used a "straightforward
term-frequency approach" to examine the material culture of
eighteenth-century London by identifying the objects listed as stolen in
the more than 30,000 trials for theft included in the *Old Bailey
Proceedings*. This evidence is framed as a counterpoint to the probate
inventories on which existing scholarship relied, privileging "the
ephemeral objects found out of doors, unlocked, and on the person"
rather than "large-ticket items, domestic in character.\" From the list
of objects that appeared most frequently, they narrowed their focus to
"two frequently stolen cloth items, handkerchiefs and sheets, and two
frequently stolen metal items, watches and spoons." Given that several
of the terms, such as silver, could be either an object or be used as an
adjective, that analysis required extracting two-term phrases (bigrams)
that feature those objects to "mitigate linguistic ambiguity by focusing
attention on pairs typically constituted of an adjective and a noun,
such as \'linen handkerchief.\" The argument examined each object in
term, considering their nature, comparing them, and charting their
changing frequency over time to reveal a world of commonplace objects.

Rather than objects, Cameron Blevins "measure\[s\] the frequency and
distribution of specific geographic place-names across the pages of the
*Houston Daily Post*" to examine "how newspapers construct space in an
age of nationalizing forces."[^56] While newspapers are a familiar
source, Blevins' argument is based on evidence of the scale and
comprehensiveness made possible by digital methods, an examination of
1700 issues and aggregation of all the contents of those issues, from
news to classified ads. He structures the argument in terms of the two
distinct scales of the paper's imagined geography that appear when the
frequencies with which places appear are visualized on maps: "a national
scale oriented toward New York and the American Midwest, and a dominant
regional scale of Texas and its immediate orbit." At the national scale,
Blevins placed that 'imagined' geography in the context of "actual"
geography to highlight anomalies: cities that appear other than those
largest in population; and an absence of the American South. Overlaying
a map of the railroad network indicates that places which do feature in
the paper are oriented to that network. Blevins shifts the scale of his
analysis to confirm that finding. First, a close reading that found a
recurring section of the paper devoted to railroads. Then a sampled
content analysis, mapping what types of content appeared in what parts
of each issue of the paper to effectively create a close reading based
on layout that was statistically extended to the newspaper as a whole,
found a larger relative presence of these cities in commercial content
than any other category. Far more of the newspaper focused on Texas and
surrounding areas than further afield. Shifting scale to look at where
those places appeared, Blevins found them in fragmentary and
nonnarrative content such as advertisements, which came to prominence
due to shifts in American journalism.

Questions about borrowings and relationships between texts are generally
framed in terms of specific publications, so often involve not simply "a
question looking for a corpus" but the creation of datasets for
analysis. One of the authors, in collaboration with Kellen Funk, created
a corpus of 222 statutes consisting of around 180,000 regulations to
identify borrowings among those statutes and the extent of the influence
of New York's Field Code. Dividing text into individual sections of
code, and working with five-word groups in each section, they generated
similarity scores that identified which section of a previous code, if
any, it was most likely derived, identifying 106,000 borrowings. The
argument of our "The Spine of American Law: Digital Text Analysis and U.
S. Legal Practice" followed the structure of shifting scales toward a
close reading, with different methods used to identify patterns at
different scales of analysis: network analysis, visualizations and
clustering.[^57] Examining each code as a whole**,** section to section
borrowings were aggregated to show how many each code borrowed from each
other code, with the results visualized as a network graph that showed
the sequence of borrowing and creation of regional families of codes.
Borrowing within each code was analyzed by visualizing each code as a
grid with each box colored to the code from which it was borrowed.
Finally, to analyze individual sections independent of their code they
were clustered based on similarity to each other, and sorted
chronologically. That approach of "taking them out of the context of the
codes and putting them into the context of their particular variations"
represented a form of "algorithmic close reading" in directing attention
to variations in sections.[^58] These analyses identified the states
whose archives should be the focus of research and close reading to
explain the patterns of borrowing.

Melodee Beals developed a more iterative approach to shifting scales in
using text analysis to explore the textual reappearance that
characterized nineteenth-century newspapers. Focusing on the *Caledonian
Mercury*, Beals first compared it to two contemporary London newspapers,
examining individual pages for a match of at least 100 words per page in
clusters of at least twenty words each. To test the result that an
average of three to four percent of each issue was duplicate material,
shifted to a close reading of five issues that disambiguated the text
and "categorising and numbering individual textual units by type, topic,
geography, source, and word count," and by location in the paper.[^59]
Those close readings are presented in color coded charts to allow for
visual comparison, with clear patterns visible. At least five times more
of the content is duplicated material than was identified by
computational analysis. Beals then extrapolated back from the close
reading to distant reading, taking the quantitative data about the
distribution across different categories and lengths of items and
scaling those results to a wider analysis of all issues of *Caledonian
Mercury* to provide a more complete picture of duplicate texts.

In conclusion, we think that the discussion above demonstrates that
digital historians can make meaningful historical interpretations if
they chose to do so. Certainly, despite earlier doubts that they would,
digital historians have begun to make such arguments in their specific
fields of study. By drawing together such works of scholarship for
discussion in this essay, we hope to show the possibilities for
argumentative scholarship for other digital historians. But ultimately,
digital historians will need to know not just whether such scholarship
is possible but how they should go about it. Leonardo Barleta and Rachel
Midura's articles in this special section provide two models for such
scholarship. And their annotated articles, along with those of eight
other scholars, illustrate the patterns of argumentation implicit in
their historical interpretations. We hope that many other digital
historians will emulate such patterns, and even develop new patterns of
argumentation of their own.[^60]

[^1]: The exception is that, by and large, even conventional historical
    scholarship has been transformed by access to databases of primary
    sources. We are entirely in agreement with the point of view that
    searching databases is a form of digital scholarship. Nevertheless,
    we still find it worthwhile to draw a distinction between the
    practices of conventional historians, however much they have been
    affected by digital sources and research techniques, and the
    practices of digital historians who explicitly identify as such. See
    Lara Putnam, "The Transnational and the Text-Searchable: Digitized
    Sources and the Shadows They Cast," *American Historical Review*
    121, no. 2 (2016): 377--402,
    [https://doi.org/10.1093/ahr/121.2.377](https://doi.org/10.1093/ahr/121.2.377);
    Julia Laite, "The Emmet's Inch: Small History in a Digital Age,"
    *Journal of Social History* 53, no. 4 (June 1, 2020): 963--89,
    [https://doi.org/10.1093/jsh/shy118](https://doi.org/10.1093/jsh/shy118);
    and Tim Hitchcock, "Digital Searching and the Re-formulation of
    Historical Knowledge," in *The Virtual Representation of the Past*,
    eds Mark Greengrass and Lorna hughes (Farnham: Ashgate, 2008),
    81-90.

[^2]: Stephen Robertson, "The Differences Between Digital Humanities and
    Digital History," in *Debates in Digital Humanities 2016*, eds
    Matthew Gold and Lauren Klein (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota
    Press, 2016),
    [https://dhdebates.gc.cuny.edu/read/untitled/section/ed4a1145-7044-42e9-a898-5ff8691b6628\#ch25](https://dhdebates.gc.cuny.edu/read/untitled/section/ed4a1145-7044-42e9-a898-5ff8691b6628#ch25).

[^3]: Roy Rosenzweig, "Scarcity or Abundance? Preserving the Past in a
    Digital Age," American Historical Review 108, 3 (2003), 760.

[^4]: Tom Scheinfeldt, "Where's the Beef? Does Digital Humanities Have
    to Answer Questions?" reprinted in *Debates in the Digital
    Humanities* ed Matthew K. Gold (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota
    Press, 2012),
    [https://dhdebates.gc.cuny.edu/read/40de72d8-f153-43fa-836b-a41d241e949c/section/3c03ecdb-2dcf-4597-8fc4-e42f8dcc21e1\#p1b2](https://dhdebates.gc.cuny.edu/read/40de72d8-f153-43fa-836b-a41d241e949c/section/3c03ecdb-2dcf-4597-8fc4-e42f8dcc21e1#p1b2)

[^5]: Robert Nelson, *Mining the Dispatch* (Digital Scholarship Lab,
    University of Richmond, 20??, updated November 2020),
    [https://dsl.richmond.edu/dispatch/](https://dsl.richmond.edu/dispatch/).

[^6]: Edward Ayers, Anne Sarah Rubin, William G. Thomas III, and Andrew
    Torget, *The Valley of the Shadow: Two Communities in the American
    Civil War*, <https://valley.lib.virginia.edu/>

[^7]: Edward Ayers, *In the Presence of Mine Enemies: War in the Heart
    of America, 1859-1863* (New York, Norton, 2003); Edward Ayers, *The
    Thin Light of Freedom: The Civil War and Emancipation in the Heart
    of America* (New York: Norton, 2018).

[^8]: Jane Kamensky, *The Exchange Artist: A Tale of High-Flying
    Speculation and America's First Banking Collapse* (New York:
    Penguin Book, 2008).

[^9]: Arguing with Digital History working group, "Digital History and
    Argument," white paper, Roy Rosenzweig Center for History and New
    Media(November 13, 2017):
    [https://rrchnm.org/argument-white-paper/](https://rrchnm.org/argument-white-paper/).

[^10]: Genevieve Carpio and Andrzej Rutkowski, Mariola Espinosa,
    Jacquelyne Howard, Erin Sassin, Lauren Tilton, and Nathan Tye also
    participated in the workshops. We thank them all for their
    willingness to take the time to share their work, and take on the
    challenge of developing historical arguments. Thanks also to Matthew
    Karush and Sam Lebovic, the editor and associate editor of the
    *Journal of Social History*, who gave up their time to provide the
    participants with invaluable insight into the publication and peer
    review process.

[^11]: Robert Darnton, *The Great Cat Massacre and Other Episodes in
    French Cultural History* (New York: Basic Books, 1984); Joan Wallach
    Scott, \"Gender: A Useful Category of Historical Analysis,\" *The
    American Historical Review*, 91 no. 5 (1986): 1053--1075.
    https://doi.org/[10.2307/1864376](https://doi.org/10.2307%2F1864376).

[^12]: See "Data First" annotation, on *Models of argument-driven
    digital history,*
    [https://model-articles.chnm.org/](https://model-articles.chnm.org/).

[^13]: Karen Halttunen, "Groundwork: American Studies in Place:
    Presidential Address to the American Studies Association, November
    4, 2005," *American Quarterly* 58, 1 (2006), 3.

[^14]: Edward Ayers and Scott Nesbit, "Seeing Emancipation: Scale and
    Freedom in the American South," *Journal of the Civil War Era* 1, 1
    (2011), 3, 10. An annotated version of this article appears on
    *Models of argument-driven digital history*,
    [https://model-articles.chnm.org/](https://model-articles.chnm.org/).

[^15]: Ayers and Nesbit, 14, 17

[^16]: Nicholas Terpstra, "Locating the Sex Trade in the Early Modern
    City," in *Mapping Space, Sense and Movement in Florence*, eds
    Nicholas Terpstra and Colin Rose (Routledge, 2016), 122.

[^17]: Terpstra, 115

[^18]: Terpstra, 115, 121

[^19]: Catherine Clarke, "Place, identity, and performance: spatial
    practices and social proxies in medieval Swansea," *Journal of
    Medieval History* 41, 3 (2015), 256.

[^20]: Clarke, 257, 258.

[^21]: Susannah Ottaway and Auston Mason, "Reconsidering Poor Law
    Institutions by Virtually Reconstructing and Re-Viewing an
    Eighteenth-Century Workhouse," *The Historical Journal* (2020), 10

[^22]: Ottaway and Mason, 25.

[^23]: Harmony Bench and Kate Elswit, "Katherine Dunham's Global Method
    and the Embodied Politics of Dance's Everyday," *Theatre Survey* 61
    (2020), 308. For another example of an argument based on quantifying
    movement, in this case the voyages of shipping vessels, see Sean
    Fraga, "Digitally Mapping Commercial Currents: Maritime Mobility,
    Vessel technology and U.S. Colonization of Puget Sound, 1851-1861,
    *Current Research in Digital History* 3 (2020),
    [https://crdh.rrchnm.org/essays/v03-03-mapping-commercial-currents/](https://crdh.rrchnm.org/essays/v03-03-mapping-commercial-currents/).

[^24]: Leo Barleta, "Spatial Genealogies Mobility, Settlement, and
    Empire-Building in the Brazilian Backlands, 1650-1800," *Journal of
    Social History.* An annotated version of this article appears on
    *Models of argument-driven digital history*,
    [https://model-articles.chnm.org/](https://model-articles.chnm.org/).

[^25]: More details of these sources and the process by which Barleta
    created data from them, see the annotation "About Sources" at
    *Models of argument-driven digital history*,
    [https://model-articles.chnm.org/](https://model-articles.chnm.org/).

[^26]: Ruth Ahnert, Sebastian Ahnert, Catherine Nicole Coleman, and
    Scott Weingart, *The Network Turn: Changing Perspectives in the
    Humanities* (Cambridge: Cambridge University Press, 2020), 7.

[^27]: Caroline Winterer, "Where is America in the Republic of Letters?"
    *Modern Intellectual History* 9, 3 (2012), 597. An annotated version
    of this article appears on *Models of argument-driven digital
    history*,
    [https://model-articles.chnm.org/](https://model-articles.chnm.org/).

[^28]: Winterer, 610.

[^29]: Winterer, 611.

[^30]: The same pattern of argument is evident in Dan Edelstein and
    Biliana Kassabova's "How England Fell Off the Map of Voltaire's
    Enlightenment article." A visualization showing limited
    correspondence between Voltaire and England at odds with its reputed
    importance to him frames the argument, but a critical analysis of
    the underlying data and a close reading of the text of those letters
    develops the interpretation, rather than any further analysis of the
    visualization. Dan Edelstein and Biliana Kassabova, "How England
    Fell Off the Map of Voltaire's Enlightenment article," *Modern
    Intellectual History* 17, 1 (2020), 29-53.

[^31]: Robert Morrissey, "Kaskaskia Social Network: Kinship and
    Assimilation in the French-Illinois Borderlands, 1695--1735,"
    *William and Mary Quarterly* 70, 1 (2013), 105)

[^32]: Morrissey, 107.

[^33]: Morrissey, 124.

[^34]: Morrissey, 142.

[^35]: Maeve Kane, "For Wagrassero's Wife's Son: Colonialism and the
    Structure of Indigenous Women's Social Connections, 1690--1730,"
    *Journal of Early American History* 7, 2 (2017). An annotated
    version of this article appears on *Models of argument-driven
    digital history*,
    [https://model-articles.chnm.org/](https://model-articles.chnm.org/).
    For another example that uses a variety of different sources to
    identify the presence of women in Ottoman-Algerian social networks,
    see Ashley Saunders, "Silent No More: Women as Significant Political
    Intermediaries in Ottoman Algeria," *Current Research in Digital
    History* 3 (2020),
    [https://crdh.rrchnm.org/essays/v03-05-silent-no-more/](https://crdh.rrchnm.org/essays/v03-05-silent-no-more/).

[^36]: Kane, 112.

[^37]: Kane, 113.

[^38]: Kane, 112.

[^39]: Kane, 114.

[^40]: Ruth Ahnert and Sebastian Ahnert, "Protestant Letter Networks in
    the Reign of Mary I: A Quantitative Approach," *ELH* 82, 1 (2015).
    An annotated version of this article appears on *Models of
    argument-driven digital history*,
    [https://model-articles.chnm.org/](https://model-articles.chnm.org/).

[^41]: For a discussion of the advantages of using quantitative criteria
    to establish categories rather than human-assigned categories, see
    annotation titled ? in *Models of argument-driven digital history*

[^42]: Rachel Midura, "Itinerating Europe: Early Modern Spatial Networks
    in Printed Itineraries, 1545--1700," *Journal of Social History*, 1- 41. An annotated version of this article appears
    on *Models of argument-driven digital history*,
    [https://model-articles.chnm.org/](https://model-articles.chnm.org/).

[^43]: Midura, 5.

[^44]: Midura, 31.

[^45]: Midura, 4.

[^46]: Midura, "Itinerating Europe: Early Modern Spatial Networks in Printed Itineraries, 1545--1700," in *Models of Argument-Driven Digital History*, eds. Mullen, Lincoln and Stephen Robertson.

[^47]: Midura, 17.

[^48]: Midura, "Itinerating Europe," in *Models of Argument-Driven Digital History*.

[^49]: Midura, 23.

[^50]: For a useful elaboration of the relationship between distant
    reading (here termed machine reading) and close reading, see
    Katherine Hayles, *How We Think: Digital Media and Contemporary
    Technogenesis* (Chicago, University of Chicago Press, 2012), 57-59,
    68-75.

[^51]: Tim Hitchcock and William Turkel, "The Old Bailey Proceedings,
    1674--1913: Text Mining for Evidence of Court Behavior," *Law and
    History Review* 34, 4 (2016), 929-55. An annotated version of this
    article appears on *Models of argument-driven digital history*,
    [https://model-articles.chnm.org/](https://model-articles.chnm.org/).

[^52]: Sharon Block and David Newman, "What, Where, When, and Sometimes
    Why: Data Mining Two Decades of Women's History Abstracts," *Journal
    of Women's History* 23, 1 (2011), 82. An annotated version of this
    article appears on *Models of argument-driven digital history*,
    [https://model-articles.chnm.org/](https://model-articles.chnm.org/).

[^53]: Jo Guldi, "Parliament's Debates about Infrastructure: An
    Exercise in Using Dynamic Topic Models to Synthesize Historical
    Change," *Technology and Culture* 60, 1 (2019), 3. An annotated
    version of this article appears on *Models of argument-driven
    digital history*,
    [https://model-articles.chnm.org/](https://model-articles.chnm.org/).

[^54]: Guldi, 9.

[^55]: Guldi, 27.

[^56]: Cameron Blevins, "Space, Nation, and the Triumph of Region: A
    View of the World from Houston," *Journal of American history* 101 1
    (2014), 122-47; and Cameron Blevins, "Mining and Mapping the
    Production of Space: A View of the World from Houston," (2014),
    [http://web.stanford.edu/group/spatialhistory/cgi-bin/site/pub.php?id=93](http://web.stanford.edu/group/spatialhistory/cgi-bin/site/pub.php?id=93).

[^57]: Kellen Funk and Lincoln Mullen, "The Spine of American Law:
    Digital Text Analysis and U.S. Legal Practice," *American Historical
    Review* 123, 1 (2018): 132-64. For another example of an argument
    about text reuse developed at multiple scales, in this case in
    Indian treaties, see Joshua Catalano, "Digitally Analyzing the
    Uneven Ground: Language Borrowing Among Indian Treaties," *Current
    Research in Digital History* 1 (2018),
    [https://crdh.rrchnm.org/essays/v01-02-digitally-analyzing-the-uneven-ground/](https://crdh.rrchnm.org/essays/v01-02-digitally-analyzing-the-uneven-ground/).

[^58]: Funk and Mullen, 154.

[^59]: Melodee Beals, "Close Readings of Big Data: Triangulating
    Patterns of Textual Reappearance and Attribution in the Caledonian
    Mercury, 1820--40," *Victorian Periodicals Review* 51, 4 (2018),
    620, 623. An annotated version of this article appears on *Models of
    argument-driven digital history*,
    [https://model-articles.chnm.org/](https://model-articles.chnm.org/).

[^60]: See *Models of argument-driven digital history*,
    [https://model-articles.chnm.org/](https://model-articles.chnm.org/).
