---
title: "For Wagrassero's Wife's Son: "
weight: 10 
subtitle: Colonialism and the Structure of Indigenous Women's Social Connections, 1690-1730
doi: https://doi.org/10.31835/ma.2021.10
draft: false
author: 
- name: Maeve Kane
  affiliation: University at Albany
  email: mkane2@albany.edu
citation:
- author: Kane, Maeve
  title: "For Wagrassero's Wife's Son: Colonialism and the Structure of Indigenous Women's Social Connections, 1690-1730"
  journal: Journal of Early American History
  year: 2017
  volume: 7
  issue: 
  pages: 89-114
  doi: http://doi.org/10.1163/18770703-00702002

---

{{% notation title="Headnote" %}}

This project grew out of frustration with account books as a source for
Indigenous women's history. The original concept for my book project was
a methodologically very traditional one, focused on Haudenosaunee
women's economic lives in the 17th and 18th centuries. For this kind of
work, there are a handful of 17^th^ and 18^th^ century account books
that document specific purchases by named individual women. These
account books are mainly repetitious lists of who bought what when,
without much other detail, which makes them difficult sources for
traditional close reading. The specific sources I examine in this piece
are known in my subfield of Haudenosaunee history, but not widely
analyzed because they include relatively few individuals who appear in
other documents.

This piece, and my own methodological shift towards digital humanities
methods like social network analysis, grew out of a realization that I
was dealing with a type of evidence that was unmanageable with
traditional close reading techniques. I had lists upon lists of who
bought what, and sometimes who it was bought for, and no way to make
sense of those relationships. My own path into digital humanities
methods started with a search for flow-chart making software to make
sense of the hand-drawn map of relationships I was seeing in my sources,
before I ever realized that network analysis existed as a method.

{{% /notation %}}

## Abstract

{{% notation title="Ethnonyms" %}}

Publication conventions for ethnonyms in early American scholarship have
been changing in the past several years; at the time I wrote this piece
in 2015-2016, there was some movement towards endonyms such as
Haudenosaunee, but some venues preferred more widely used exonyms such
as Iroquois, which was ultimately used for the final version of this
piece. More presses and journals have moved towards endonyms in recent
years.

{{% /notation %}}

This article uses digital humanities social network analysis to examine
Native women's roles in overlapping familial and economic social ties
revealed in two early Dutch account books. Taken individually these
records are difficult to fit into broader analyses; many of the
individual Native people who appear in early account books are recorded
only once or at most a handful of times and rarely appear in other
documentary sources. The contrasting structures of two contemporary
Haudenosaunee and Munsee social networks reconstructed from these
account books illustrates the extent of colonial views into Indigenous
social life and colonial perceptions of Indigenous women within their
communities. Where Haudenosaunee women were visible in these networks as
bridges between Indigenous kin groups, Munsee women were perceived as
pushed to the margins of their own kinship networks, illustrating the
process of erasure in the settler colonial archive.

keywords: Iroquois; social networks; colonialism; New York; gender;
Munsee; methodology

{{% notation title="Interdisciplinary influences" %}}

My interest in the visibility and colonial archival documentation of
Indigenous women reflects consideration of multi-scalar analysis done by
archaeologists Barbara Voss, Steve Silliman, Kurt Jordan, and others.
Multi-scalar analysis in archaeology considers fine-grained analysis of
single sites, the context of a single site within its larger settlement,
individual movement between sites, and broad social, political, and
historical context. This methodological approach informed my own
conception of what might be made visible in close and distant reading of
archival material through methods like social network analysis.

{{% /notation %}}

In late September 1703, an unnamed Mohawk woman bought a shirt for a
child. She gave Evert Wendell, a trader in Albany, New York, "one not
very good beaver and another beaver" for the shirt. Although she traded
with Wendell for eight years, he never identified her by name, and yet
in the process of recording her purchases, Wendell recorded her central
importance to a web of kin and economic relations. "Arija's mother," as
Wendell identified her, was recorded first in relation to her closest
male kin as Wendell made sense of indigenous kinship ties through the
lens of European expectations, and the shirt was purchased for
"Wagrassero's wife's son," identified again through a male figure
Wendell may have thought of as a head of household. Arija's mother sent
another unnamed Mahican woman with payment of a debt and purchased rum
through an unrelated Mohawk man---the mundane connections of everyday
life which bound communities together and were rarely recorded, or
recorded women in ways that erased their social individuality, like
Arija's mother. By examining connections like these in two contemporary
networks, colonial perceptions of indigenous women's roles in their own
communities can be made visible. In the Haudenosaunee network Arija's
mother was part of, Wendell perceived women like her to be important
bridges between intra-Haudenosaunee sub-communities, while a
contemporary trader perceived Munsee women as having been pushed to the
margins of their own communities.[^1]

{{% notation title="The problem of tiny data" %}}

The process of working with the data for this project pushed me towards
questions of absence, erasure, and agnotology. These questions are
always present in Indigenous history, but digital humanities work
sharpens their importance because computational methods do not allow for
ambiguity or absence.

{{% /notation %}}

{{% notation title="Historiography and approach" %}}

Historiographically, the issue of cause and effect for Indigenous land
loss and self-determination is one of the major questions for the
subfield of Indigenous history in early America. Approaching the account
books data through the lens of the historiography helped me understand
the significance of the contrast between the two networks.

{{% /notation %}}

This article examines Native women's roles in the overlapping kin and
economic ties in Haudenosaunee and Munsee communities by analyzing two
credit account books which documented Indigenous kinship and social ties
in the course of recording purchases, debts and payments. These briefly
mentioned social connections are difficult to make meaning of using
traditional historical methods, but taken together they build Indigenous
social networks as perceived by European settlers who recorded them.
Digital humanities methods, such as the social network analysis approach
here to reconstruct colonial understandings of Indigenous social ties,
have been pioneered to work with much larger sources of data than are
typically available for Indigenous history. This article argues, first,
that digital humanities methods, of which social network analysis is but
one example, have both limitations and potentials for scholars of
Indigenous and other groups who did not leave the copious written
records upon which digital humanities methods rely. In the case
presented here, social network analysis reveals a shift from colonial
understandings of Native women as central to Indigenous networks for
groups such as the Haudenosaunee which were entangled in colonial
systems but not wholly subject to them, to colonial perception of Native
women as marginalized in their own communities for groups such as the
Munsee which were more heavily impacted by settler colonial pressures of
land loss, population pressure, and loss of political
self-determination.

{{% notation title="Understanding network structure" %}}

My focus in this piece was on the contrast between the closely
contemporary Indigenous networks and how they were understood by
settlers, but working through the significance of network structure in
this piece made apparent for me that differences between how settler and
Indigenous networks are recorded needs study as well.

{{% /notation %}}

{{% notation title="Locating individuals methodologically" %}}

Social details were often the only way I was able to distinguish between
multiple relatively anonymous people. Many women had accounts of their
own but were only noted as "Indian woman," "female savage," or similar.
I erred on the side of caution and gave each individual a unique
identifying number if it was not clear from social details such as
"Arija's mother" or "Wagrassero's wife" that an "Indian woman" on one
page was the same "Indian woman" on another page. The close reading of
these social details in order to encode identification for social
network analysis made me realize that the traders had to understand the
social context the Indigenous women lived in out of necessity, even if
the traders' own social context made them believe the women's names were
unnecessary to record.

{{% /notation %}}

The two contemporary account books examined here reflect these shifting
colonial understandings of Indigenous social networks in the ways they
recorded Native customer's identities. In Albany, New York, Dutch
heritage trader Evert Wendell kept an account book of trade with Six
Nations Haudenosaunee and Mahican customers between 1696 and 1726,
recording debits of payments made and credits of goods purchased carried
over for months or even years under the name of an individual. The
Ulster account book likewise recorded social and kinship ties for the
purpose of tracking debits and credits. Kept in Dutch by an unknown
trader first in Kingston, New York, and later in Ulster, New York,
between 1712 and 1732, the Ulster account book recorded accounts with
both Munsee and European customers. The Ulster account book did not
record ties between Munsee and European customers, so only the Munsee
network is analyzed here. Both account books are among the earliest
direct records of Indian trade with named individuals, and for many of
the Indigenous people whose accounts were recorded, the two account
books are the only known archival record in which they appear. Along
with physical descriptions, Wendell and the Ulster trader at times
described individuals in terms of their social relations with other
Indigenous people, identifying family members of a new customer or
noting the name of an existing customer who stood as a credit surety for
a first-time customer. Wendell and the Ulster trader also noted social
ties in the process of recording of debits and credits, as when siblings
paid one another's debts. As Native customers came and went with
sometimes years between visits, recording these social ties helped
identify individuals by placing them in their social context as Wendell
and the Ulster trader understood it.[^2]

{{% notation title="Georeferencing" %}}

I considered but ultimately decided against a geographically referenced
network visualization for this piece because it didn't seem like it
would help advance my argument. First, there was relatively little
geographic information in the data I was working with beyond national
identification---I could have plotted Onondaga individuals to a central
point within their historical territories, for example, but tying all
individuals from a nation was less useful for the Ulster network of all
Munsee individuals. Some Seneca accounts in the Wendell data had the
town of their residence within Seneca territory, but not enough
individuals had that level of geographic detail to make a geographically
referenced network useful.

{{% /notation %}}

{{< figure src="/img/Kane_image1.png" alt="Map of the northeastern United States showing the Haudenosaunee Five Nations.">}}

{{% notation title="Data limitations" %}}

One of the historiographic questions on my mind writing this piece that
the data did not let me pursue was the issue of how much contact
Laurentian or "Canadian" Mohawks from St. Regis, Kahnawake, and other
domicilé communities had with Confederacy Mohawk. Although Wendell had
Laurentian and Confederacy Mohawk customers, his accounts did not note
any connections between them.

{{% /notation %}}

The Haudenosaunee Five Nations include the Mohawk, Oneida, Cayuga,
Onondaga, and Seneca, and after 1722, the Tuscarora (becoming known as
the Six Nations), though Wendell's Haudenosaunee customers included only
individuals from the original Five Nations. In this article
Haudenosaunee is used solely as a shorthand to refer to Five Nations
groups rather than the broader Iroquoian cultural groups of Laurentian
Iroquois or Mingoes of the Ohio Country, reflecting Wendell's limited
contact with those groups. With territories ranging from roughly modern
Albany, New York in the east through southern Canada and modern Buffalo,
New York in the west, the Six Nations had early and sustained contact
with French, Dutch, German and English settlers along the frontiers of
Iroquoia with a minimum of European settlement in core Haudenosaunee
homelands until late in the eighteenth century. The relatively late
encroachment of white settlement compared with the experience of other
eastern Native groups resulted from a combination of Haudenosaunee
political and military neutrality for much of the seventeenth and
eighteenth centuries, advantageous geographic position, and shrewd
diplomatic maneuvering, producing interconnected Native and non-Native
communities along the frontiers of Iroquoia. The Wendell account book
covers the period immediately proceeding and following the 1701 Treaty
of Montreal and Haudenosaunee neutrality during Queen Anne's War,
reflecting a period of relative equilibrium in Iroquoia after several
decades of war with New France and their Native allies.[^3]

The significant number of women in the Wendell accountbook---half of all
customers---indicates the safety of travel through Iroquoia facilitated
by Haudenosaunee neutrality in early eighteenth century colonial
conflicts. Haudenosaunee women's place within their communities has
been reassessed by a number of scholars in recent years, part of a
broader realignment of the subfield of Haudenosaunee studies as a whole.
The broad outlines of Haudenosaunee gender roles are familiar to many
working in early American scholarship, with matrilineal, matrifocal
extended family households which controlled agricultural production and
influenced the consensus-based political life of the village. Clan
mothers selected hereditary chiefs; female heads of household controlled
land and food, distributing provisions to war parties; women's councils
called for peace and war; and matrons decided the fate of prisoners. The
direct involvement of Haudenosaunee women outside the supposed domestic
space of village and field has received renewed attention in recent
years, with new studies suggesting that both Haudenosaunee women and men
traveled frequently within and beyond Iroquoia, shaping the contours of
contact with settler communities along the frontiers of Iroquoia to a
much greater degree than previously thought.[^4] Although recent
scholarship on Haudenosaunee women has shown their presence and
significance beyond the village and clearing, there has been
comparatively little reassessment of how women's contacts reshaped
diplomatic and quotidian interactions, or how Haudenosaunee women's
roles in these interactions differed from the intermarriage and
métissage of the *pays d\'en haut* or the tensely negotiated fictive
kinship of the midcontinent.[^5]

The Munsee to the south who traded at Ulster faced far greater colonial
pressures. By one estimate, at the turn of the eighteenth century their
population had fallen to 1000 to 1600 individuals, with only five
percent of their homelands remaining unsold. Closer to expanding English
populations, they also faced far pressure from expanding Euroamerican
settlements, debt and dependence in colonial cash economies, and
pressure from colonial governments which "used economic dependence as a
tool of empire to force political capitulation." Although the presence
of Munsee customers trading at Ulster testifies to their continued
presence in the face of land secessions and population pressures pushing
their communities further inland, recent scholarship has pointed to a
loss of political self determination by the early eighteenth century as
Munsee communities struggled economically at the fringes of Dutch-Anglo
settlement.[^6]

Despite these pressures, Munsee women and ties through maternal kinship
remained central to Munsee life well into the eighteenth century, with
Munsee women continuing to serve as important economic actors and
leaders. Like the Haudenosaunee, the Algonquian Munsee and broader
Delaware culture groups were matrilineal, practicing gendered
horticulture and seasonal subsistence rounds to complement increasing
participation in colonial wage work and day labor. Munsee women's
"adaptive capacity" to work within and around the changing colonial
system reinforced the importance of matrilineal kinship ties and
networks of women. These ties were especially important at the household
and family level, where Munsee women mediated ties between male leaders,
maternal kinship ties remained essential to navigating community
leadership, and women directed missionary efforts within their
communities. The well-known rhetorical construction of the Delaware as
metaphorical women by Haudenosaunee diplomats and others suggests a
tension between rhetorical constructions of women as both marginal to
formal diplomacy and central to the daily life of the community.[^7]

{{% notation title="Data structure" %}}

My initial interest in both account books was for the information about
goods traded, so my transcription of the Wendell account book was
structured to enable ease of counting goods and payments. Translating
this to a network structure meant restructuring my data listing each
exchange on an account (the first image below) into two relational
tables listing descriptive information (the second image) and
connections between individuals (the third image). Indigenous names were
recorded with incredibly varied spelling, even when it was apparent the
account was for the same person, so I opted to give each individual a
unique identifying number. In my more recent work, I merge names with
different spellings into one canonical name using OpenRefine for easier
troubleshooting later in the workflow. This translation of exchange data
into network data also required creating entries for individuals who
were only implied in the data through their social relationships but
didn\'t make purchases of their own.

{{< figure src="/img/KaneDS1.png" alt="Part 1 of 3 showing a spreadsheet screenshot demonstrating the workflow to create the data set.">}}

{{< figure src="/img/KaneDS2.png" alt="Part 2 of 3 showing a spreadsheet screenshot demonstrating the workflow to create the data set." >}}

{{< figure src="/img/KaneDS3.png" atl=" Part 3 of 3 showing the network data spreadsheet as an example of the workflow." >}}

{{% /notation %}}

The social ties that were recorded in these account books suggest that
in early eighteenth century New York, Haudenosaunee women were perceived
by colonists as bridges between intra-Haudenosaunee sub-communities,
while Munsee women were perceived by colonial observers as pushed to the
margins of their communities. Cultural differences between the
Haudenosaunee and the Algonquian Munsee and the idiosyncracies of the
individual traders of course cannot be discounted, but the two
contemporaneous, geographically proximate networks presented here were
documented through similar Anglo-Dutch credit processes and yet differ
greatly in their gendered structure. In the economic snapshots provided
by the two account books, Haudenosaunee and Munsee women shared striking
similarities and a few key differences. In both cases, women
participated in about half of all accounts---that is, half of all
accounts included at least one woman making purchases under her own name
or that of a male account holder, often her husband or other male
relative. In both the Wendell and Ulster account books, women were the
sole account holder on about twenty percent of all accounts. And yet
Haudenosaunee and Munsee purchases differed in important ways: where
Haudenosaunee customers mainly purchased cloth (53.8% of all purchases)
and paid debts with peltry, Munsee customers also bought cloth, but at
rates roughly comparable with alcohol and ammunition (35.5%, 29.2% and
23.2%, respectively), and paid debts with cash and day labor.
Additionally, while purchases of food were not a significant proportion
of purchases by Munsee customers---only 2.9%---Haudenosaunee customers
made almost no food purchases. This suggests that Munsee customers were
much more deeply entangled in and at times dependent upon participation
in colonial labor systems, and while Haudenosaunee customers
participated in the fur trade, they did so without the more direct,
daily colonial entanglement of day labor and were less reliant for basic
necessities like food.[^8]

The difference between the structure of Haudenosaunee and Munsee social
networks which Wendell and the Ulster trader envisioned despite
similarities in women's rate of participation and roles within their
communities suggests that imagined marginalization of Indigenous women
was part of settler colonialism's cycle of displacement, erasure, and
replacement. Alongside the more direct colonialist pressures of land
dispossession, debt, and economic dependence, Munsee women were seen
through the colonial lens to be less influential in their own
communities. Whether Munsee women were in lived reality pushed to the
margins of their communities while Haudenosaunee women functioned as
bridges between subcommunities is not determinable from network
structure alone---though recent scholarship suggests that Munsee women
were not marginalized any more than Haudenosaunee women. Rather, the
contrasting network structures here illustrate the process of settler
colonial erasure as it was inscribed, in the perceived attenuation of
Indigenous social ties.[^9]

The status of Indigenous family structures has been used in the
scholarship of Native history as a barometer of colonialism---large,
matrilocal extended families taken as indicators of strong self
determination, while nuclear single family households have been held up
as evidence of colonialism and loss of Indigenous kin networks.
Declensionist narratives, which chart the inevitable triumph of settler
colonial groups, have recently come under renewed scrutiny in early
American history, but without a corresponding re-evaluation of Native
women's roles within their communities. Scholars of Indigenous and
early American studies are well aware of the problems of inscribing
European categories on Native groups, and this problem is compounded in
the study of Native women who were archivally erased because they were
perceived by Europeans as inherently non-public and therefore outside
the sphere of diplomatic activities copiously documented in frontier
interactions. Individual Native women are comparatively much more
visible in genres of documents like account books in which these
Anglophone divisions of public and private had not yet firmly taken
hold.[^10]

## The Problem and Potential of Tiny Data

The Indigenous social networks analyzed here were built using digital
humanities methods which reveal the limits of the settler colonial
archive for documenting Indigenous social ties. Indigenous histories of
every kind, traditional and digital both, face the problem of tiny data.
Digital humanities methods have been pioneered to deal with "big data,"
or at least medium data, the massive availability of text and metadata
made possible by digitization of social life and physical archival
media. One of these methods, social network analysis, models
relationships between individuals to reveal the broader structure of
those social relationships. For humanistic study of the past, social
network analysis can be used to examine social phenomena, community
formation, and influence.[^11]

{{% notation title="Methodological parallels and limitations" %}}

This article was prompted in large part as a response to Robert Michael
Morrissey's two articles "Archives of Connection" and "Kaskaskia Social
Network." Although I was working on similar issues, with similar
evidence, and in the same historical period, I don't believe it's always
possible to reconstruct the kind of whole-network that Morrissey was
able to reconstruct for Kaskaskia due to limitations of evidence. In
attempting to see if I could reconstruct a similar whole-network with
the evidence available to me, I had to work through what I was able to
discern from a partial network.\
\
Robert Michael Morrissey, "Kaskaskia Social Network: Kinship and
Assimilation in the French-Illinois Borderlands, 1695--1735," The
William and Mary Quarterly 70, no. 1 (2013): 103--46,
[https://doi.org/10.5309/willmaryquar.70.1.0103](https://doi.org/10.5309/willmaryquar.70.1.0103);
Robert Michael Morrissey, "Archives of Connection," Historical Methods:
A Journal of Quantitative and Interdisciplinary History 48, no. 2
(2015): 67--79.

{{% /notation %}}

In the case of in Indigenous histories with necessarily tiny data, these
methods of analyzing patterns in large, well-documented networks will
never reveal the same sort of patterns because the documentation to
encompass a full recreation of all social ties simply does not exist.
However, this method of examining networks can be turned around to
examine the creation of silence in the archive itself and the
implication of this silence for the study of Indigenous kinship. The
example presented here is intended to offer a demonstration of the
promise and peril of digital humanities broadly in the study of groups
which did not leave copious written records to be digitized, by
examining the limitations and potential of one methodological approach.
By building the partial networks visible in the settler colonial
archive, it is possible to make visible the limits of settler views of
Indigenous social life. A partial network does not reveal which
individuals were most influential or central, but which individuals were
*perceived to be so* from the perspective of those documenting the
interactions. For the study of Indigenous kinship ties, this means that
a partial network can reveal the visibility of influence to European
observers.

Archival silences are a problem well known to scholars, who must
routinely work around the limitations of incomplete records, the
deliberate or non-deliberate omission of information, and the loss or
exclusion of documents from the archive. All of these points of
silencing are important for traditional history, but doubly so for
relatively new digital humanities methods, which rely on massive amounts
of digitized text and data, to analyze the past from a new angle. Recent
efforts to digitize and make publicly available print text has massively
increased the amount of data for digital humanities scholars to work
with, but for Indigenous history, print and textual epistemology often
doesn\'t fully encompass Indigenous communities, if at all. As Adeline
Koh, Roopika Risam and others have argued, digital humanities methods\'
reliance on the massive availability of print material without a
corresponding retheorization of the settler colonial archive has the
potential to recenter elite white and male subjects.[^12]

The last several decades of ethnohistory have honed techniques for
working within the limits of the archive, by reading against the grain
of archival records, reading for the agency of Indigenous people, and
centering the cultural and social contexts of Native actors. This
approach rests at least in part on the belief that Indigenous social
life can be reconstructed from the settler colonial archive. While great
strides have been made to incorporate archaeology, anthropology,
linguistics, religion and cultural practice into the reframing of
textual records, the knowability of archivally marginalized groups is
both epistemology and agnotology, a non-neutral product of colonialism,
imperialism and slavery. The study of colonialist historical memory and
historiography examines this process after the moment of encounter has
passed or as the first draft of history, rather than the process of
erasure during the moment of culture contact and documentation. These
archival silences have been long recognized in the field, but they often
remain static moments of loss rather than active moments of erasure,
part of the colonialist process and the product of many historical
choices.[^13]

One potential approach to the problem of tiny data in the settler
colonial archive is to use digital methods to examine, foreground and
analyze the creation of silences as products of colonialism which must
be confronted, as Amy Den Ouden calls for, in an anti-colonial critique
of objectivist colonial histories which accept and recreate the settler
colonial frame. In the case of reconstructing Indigenous kinship and
social ties through the lens of the settler colonial archive, social
network analysis might be most useful in exposing the limits of settler
views into Indigenous social life and the ways in which these limits
have shaped the archival and historiographical erasure of Indigenous
women.[^14]

## Methods and Approach

In the two networks examined here, each network is laid out in a force
atlas layout, which tends to cluster individuals with densest ties to
one another and spread out very influential hub individuals with little
connection to one another. Depending on the density of the connections,
individuals are clustered together or visually spread apart to give a
broader overview of the network as a whole. The physical layout of each
network is not related to geography or time; the proximity of
individuals to one another is determined by their ties to others, and
the density of their connections\' connection to others, though any
given individual may not be directly connected to a neighboring
individual, having been pulled by connections to more distant
individuals away from their nearer direct connections.

The size of each individual in each network is scaled according to the
measure of their betweenness centrality as a stand in for perception of
their social influence. An individual with a high betweenness centrality
is on the shortest path between many others in the network, while an
individual with a low betweenness centrality is marginal to their
network because they do not connect their neighbors to the shortest path
to others. Betweenness centrality therefore stands in for influence not
by the number of connections a person has, but the importance of those
connections to the wider network---a measure of the key player in, for
this instance, Six Degrees of Canowaacightuea. If one individual knows
many people, but none of them are connected to anyone else, that person
is still a very small, uninfluential dot, but if the people one
individual knows are connected to many other people, that makes the
individual a bigger dot and a more influential part of their network.
For studying Indigenous kinship ties, this betweenness centrality
measure of influence is particularly important because it lets us see
how visible Native ties within their own communities were to European
observers.

{{% notation title="Historiographic questions unanswered" %}}

The question of how and how many Haudenosaunee people lived and traveled
in territories of nations other than the one of their birth is one of
the major historiographic questions for the subfield of Iroquois
studies. I was hoping to be able to track this question through a
georeferenced network for this article, but the number of individuals
with residence mentioned were too small to make a georeferenced network
worthwhile for this piece.

{{% /notation %}}

Gender and nationality in each network was determined by the description
given within the document. In many cases, individuals were described at
least once with their tribal origin or place of residence, such as
Saakadesendee, a Mohawk "who lives in Seneca country." The few
individuals such as these who were noted as residing in other
territories were tracked as their nation of origin; in the case of
Saakadesendee, Mohawk. If the account book did not note a different
nationality for family members, individuals were assumed to be of the
same national origin as their explicitly noted familial connections, and
connections between individuals of different national origin are
therefore connections noted within the document itself. Although
Haudenosaunee family ties could and did cross national boundaries and
intra-Haudenosaunee clan affiliation was an important social organizer,
Wendell's understanding of Haudenosaunee national identity shaped how he
recorded intra-Haudenosaunee ties, and it is that perception which is
analyzed here.

For determining gender, explicit descriptions within the document were
likewise used. In cases such as this where an individual was identified
by a single common name, such as the many Gesinas, Seths, Hendricks, and
Alidas, each instance of that name was given a unique number and tracked
as a separate individual, therefore likely underestimating the number of
connections. In the account books, the traders frequently referred to
Native customers by epithets and descriptors such as "the big pockmarked
female" or "has a scar on her head from a cut," descriptions which were
used for the same individual across several interactions sometimes
spanning years. The traders also occasionally noted that an otherwise
undescribed customer had purchased and item "for her son" or other
relation, or made a note that the customer "must pay the remainder to
her when she brings the coat." The traders also frequently defined
individuals through their connections to others. For example, when
Kadaroonichthae paid a debt of one beaver pelt with its worth in wampum,
the trader did not record her gender or use pronouns to define her. He
did, however, describer her as the "mother of Nansendagqua's wife,"
making it possible to both assign her a gender and place her in relation
to others in the network.[^15]

Women like Nansendagqua's wife, "the pockmarked female," and
Canowaacightuea are like many other Indigenous women in the archives of
early America: rarely identified by their own names, identified by their
affiliation with male kin if at all, often caricatured, and rarely
visible in more than one archival source, effectively erasing them as
autonomous individuals. Canowaacightuea's other kinship ties, her social
connections beyond the brief glimpse in 1704, are not unknowable but
they are unrecorded as a part of settler colonialism's erasure and
replacement of Indigenous people. Unlike other mixed Indigenous-settler
communities which have been analyzed recently with social network
analysis, the Native communities examined here simply were not
documented as extensively in written records of any kind because they
were not integrated as fully in the settler community producing the
documentation. Especially for the study of Indigenous networks, the
available documentation is not only incomplete but often elides social
ties beyond the view of colonial record keepers; the ties recorded were
by definition only those made visible within the extent of a colonial
sphere of influence, which may not have encompassed the total lived
experience of Indigenous people.[^16]

For communities for which this full documentation does not exist, social
network analysis may be more useful in analyzing *how* and *why*
Indigenous social ties were documented in the settler colonial archive
and what that says about the visibility of Indigenous social ties to
settlers, rather than reconstructing and analyzing the social ties
themselves. These partial networks, and the settler colonial view of
Indigenous kinship networks which they capture, expose the limits of
documentability itself for understanding Indigenous social ties through
the settler colonial archive. The networks compared here, because they
are built from contemporary account books with very similar recording
practices, suggest the ways in which Native women were erased as
influential parts of their kinship networks in the process of
documentation. These partial networks are therefore a representation of
settlers\' perceptions of Indigenous kinship and social ties rather than
a full reconstruction of those ties.


  | Network | \# of connected individuals | \# of connections | Average density of connections [^17] | Network diameter [^18] | Average clustering coefficient [^19] |
  |---------|-----------------------------|-------------------|--------------------------------------|------------------------|--------------------------------------|
  | Wendell 1696-1726 | 102 | 127 | .025 | 15 | .284 |
  | Ulster 1712-1732  | 162 | 260 | .018 | 14 | .332 |


## Wendell Network 1696-1726

The Wendell network is built from the account book of Albany-area Dutch
trader Evert Wendell, kept as a ledger of debts and purchases by mainly
Haudenosaunee customers from 1696 to 1726. A small handful of
non-Haudenosaunee Native customers in the network, likely Mahican, were
probably resident very close to Albany and the Wendell family, as
suggested by their occasional payment of debts with day labor or
Wendell's description of them as a family member's servant, but the
majority of the Native people in this network traveled from their own
homes in what is now western New York or southern Canada to do business
with Wendell in Albany. Very few of these Native people were recorded in
any other documentary sources, so the view of their social ties within
their own communities was limited to what Wendell observed himself or
was told about.[^20]

Wendell's recording of these economic and kinship ties was in tension
with his perception of Native women as peripheral to their male
relations, especially in the case of women who Wendell did not name
except to define them by their relationships to others. Although Wendell
left many more female than male customers unnamed, thereby erasing them
as independent individuals, he nonetheless recorded their influence
within their communities in the very act of describing them in relation
to others. Wendell himself assessed Indigenous women like "the
Pock-marked Squaw \[sic\]," "the squaw \[sic\] brought by Groetie," or
"Aeijewassen's wife" as uninfluential in their social ties, rarely
defining men solely through their relations to others. Although men were
occasionally described through their relationships with others, it was
more often through their ties to other men. Out of the more than one
hundred individuals in the network, only four men were identified only
by their connections to women, and those women were themselves just as
often unnamed. The Mohawk men Caaheghtsiedawee, who was identified as
"married to daughter of Tanenjores's wife," or Caghneghjakoo, the "son
of Cattquierhoo's wife," were identified first by their connection to a
woman, but those women themselves were unnamed and identified by their
husband's names. Wendell very often did business with a man's wife,
mother, or sister; very rarely did he do business with a woman's husband
or brother.[^21]

Even as Wendell rhetorically erased these Indigenous women's social
individuality, his interactions with them continually emphasized their
influence within their networks. Dutch women were not subsumed under
their husbands\' legal identities as under English coverture, and
ethnically Dutch residents of English New York like Wendell had not yet
shifted to English inheritance practices in the early eighteenth
century. Wendell maintained separate accounts for husbands and wives and
some of his largest and longest-running accounts were with women, even
women who he identified only by their relation to their husbands.
Despite Wendell's rhetorical erasure of some of his female customers,
his accounts nonetheless reveal parity between the influence of Native
women and men.[^22]

{{% notation title="Methodological choices" %}}

The choice to exclude Evert Wendell and the unnamed trader in the Ulster
network from the networks they recorded was one of the things I was most
uncomfortable about from a methodological perspective when writing this
piece. In the end, I feel it was the right choice because it helped
foreground the main question of Indigenous peoples' connections to one
another but it does underline the reality of the network as a
constructed artifact.

{{% /notation %}}

The Wendell account book includes one main network and several
unconnected smaller networks. The smaller networks included two to ten
individuals, often identified by Wendell as natal or marital relations
from a single tribal background. These smaller networks have been
excluded from the visualization presented here. In theory, every Native
person recorded in the Wendell account book could be connected to every
other Native person through their connection to Wendell. This "ego
network" structure would disproportionately represent Wendell himself as
the most influential and connected person in the network, rather than
representing the network as it was made visible to Wendell. Wendell, as
well as his sister, brother, and mother, who also recorded some sales to
Native customers, have therefore been excluded from this network.[^23]

{{% notation title="Technical limitations for visualization" %}}

The technical limitations of the journal, which required black and white
images for the print edition at the time this was submitted, limited the
visualizations for this piece in many ways. I find network
visualizations with, in this instance, nationality marked by node color
much easier to read. This visualization is very "noisy" because it tries
to communicate too much information about both nationality, gender, and
gendered connections all at once. If I were to do the visualizations for
this piece again, I would visualize the network in D3.js and produce
multiple images for nationality, gender, and gendered connections.

This network visualization is slightly different than the final
published version. In both this and the later Ulster network
visualization, I originally submitted network visualizations with curved
edges out of aesthetic preference, but in later revisions of the
networks I found that straight edges and more closely clustered nodes (a
setting of the force atlas algorithm used for generating layout) made a
network that was more \"readable\" in print format. Since writing this
piece, I\'ve switched from using Gephi for analysis and visualization to
using Python NetworkX for analysis and D3.js for visualization, but my
preference with both work flows in the writing and drafting stages is
very sparse networks where the individual connections are more visible
to me as I\'m writing, and in the publication stage my preference is for
more densely clustered networks. My greatest preference for network
visualization is for an interactive format where the reader is not so
dependent on my choice of a single image to understand the network
structure, but that is often not an option, and even in interactive
formats, the initial visualization needs to be understandable without
excess visual clutter or confusion.

{{% /notation %}}

{{< figure src="/img/Kane_image2.png" alt="Example network graph.">}}

{{% notation title="Methodological limitations of visualization" %}}

The issue of visualizing mixed-gender connections is the one I am the
most dissatisfied with in this piece and in my ongoing scholarship in
this vein. Women's roles as intra-Indigenous and cross-cultural
mediators is one of the major questions of the subfield, but I have not
yet found a methodological approach with network analysis that either
quantifies or visualizes mixed-gender edges in a satisfactory way.

{{% /notation %}}

In the largest Wendell network, although women make up slightly less
than half of the individuals documented in the network and in the
account book, the median measure of women's influence and men's
influence is the same. That is, those women who were visible through the
lens of Wendell's trade were just as influential as the visible men.
From Wendell's limited perspective in Albany, filtered through his
limited view of his Native customers\' lives and filtered through his
own rhetorical erasure of women's separate identities, there was no
substantial difference in this network between the visibility of
women's influence and the visibility of men's influence. Most
significantly, as connectors between tribal subnetworks within the main
network, otherwise nameless women appear as influential ties holding the
network together. "Susanna's female savage," "Aeijawassen's wife," and
"Oneghriedhaa's wife's sister" have very small accounts of their own
or appear only on the accounts of others, but the frequency of their
appearance with others places them as central figures binding the main
network together.

Influential men in this network are prominent in the Wendell account
book both because they held large accounts with Wendell and because they
had many ties to other Native people. As represented by their degree, or
number of connections to others, men in the Wendell account book who
visited Albany frequently and bought large quantities of merchandise
appear much more influential than any women in the network. However,
these men's connections were often unconnected to any other person in
the network, making them essentially dead ends for social influence (at
least from Wendell's vantage point). Judged only on degree, or the
number of people they were connected to, Native men appear as central
hubs of connection between otherwise unconnected individuals. However,
as judged by their betweenness centrality, or their connections to
others who are connected others and their role as a short path between
individuals, these men who held large accounts with Wendell become as
prominent as unnamed women like "Susanna's female savage" or
"Aeijawassen's wife" who held relatively small accounts. Individuals
with higher betweenness centrality bind a network together and form the
central, shortest paths between most individuals. Although these women
were rhetorically erased by Wendell as independent individuals, in the
process of defining them through their relationships with others, he
also recorded their central importance in connecting their communities.

Not only did these women form the central connections through their
communities, they also bridged otherwise unconnected tribal subnetworks.
The Mohawk women "Aeijewassen's wife," "Oneghriedhaa's wife's
sister," and Kadaroonichthae as well as the Mahican woman "Susanna's
female savage" all bridged a subnetwork of their own nation with a
connection to a Native man of another Haudenosaunee nation. While men
therefore also served as bridges between tribal subnetworks, men who
served as inter-tribal bridges tended to have no other connection to the
main network, while the women they were connected to had many other
connections in the main network. Some men, like the Mohawk Arija and the
Mahican Groetie also had inter-tribal connections to other men, but the
men of other nations they were connected to tended to have additional
connections to the main network. Women therefore had the unique position
in this network of serving as the sole bridge between tribal
subnetworks.

Whether this phenomenon is due to actual patterns of Native kinship ties
or due to the limits of Wendell's perspective on the network is
unclear. Whatever the case, it does suggest that Haudenosaunee women had
far greater range of movement and connection outside their home
communities than previously recognized. Indigenous women, whether
actually or only functionally from a European perspective, acted as
primary connectors and bridges between Indigenous communities in this
network despite Wendell's rhetorical erasure of many Indigenous women
as individuals. As a small glimpse of kinship ties between Haudenosaunee
and Mahican individuals who traded at Albany, this network suggests that
the lived experience of culture contact depended in much greater degree
on the presence and activity of Indigenous women than Wendell and other
settler colonial rhetorical erasure of them would suggest.

## Ulster Network 1712-1732

{{< figure src="/img/Kane_image3.png" title="Figure 3:" alt="Ulster network graph" caption=" Ulster network, 1712-1723.  White nodes are female and black nodes are male.  Connections are colored by the gender of individuals connected: a white edge connects two women; a black edge connects two men; a gray edge connects a woman and a man." >}}

*Figure 3. Ulster network, 1712-1723. White nodes are female and black
nodes are male. Connections are colored by the gender of individuals
connected: a white edge connects two women; a black edge connects two
men; a gray edge connects a woman and a man.*

The Ulster network is roughly contemporaneous with the Wendell network,
and is built from an account book kept by an anonymous Dutch trader in
Ulster County New York between 1712 and 1732. The patterns of trade
between the anonymous Dutch trader and his Esopus, Wappinger and Munsee
Indian customers, as well as the cultural and colonial differences with
the Haudenosaunee customers documented in the Wendell account book which
these patterns suggest, have been discussed in the annotated translation
of the Ulster account book. The relationships documented in the Ulster
account book were of the same kind as those documented in the Wendell
account book, which were a mixture of kinship and economic ties
documented when family members paid debts, made purchases, or were used
by the Dutch trader to identify otherwise unnamed customers. As in the
Wendell account book, these unnamed customers identified by their
kinship connections were mainly women. The anonymous Dutch trader has
also been excluded from the network for reasons discussed above.[^24]

As a contemporaneous network documented in a similar manner to the
Wendell network, the Ulster network offers some suggestions for
understanding how the settler colonial views of these networks were
shaped by social factors. Although the Algonquian Munsee differed
culturally from the Haudenosaunee, they shared a matrilineal and
matrifocal kinship structure, as well as a common, if contested,
vocabulary of gendered kinship diplomatic metaphors. Women appear as
account holders and transacting business on others\' accounts at roughly
similar rates in the Wendell and Ulster account books, but Munsee women
in the Ulster network are much less influential on average and function
less frequently as bridges or hubs. With the exception of Kisay, a woman
who appears as the center of a very active kinship subnetwork, the most
influential Munsee women in the Ulster network appear alongside their
more influential husbands.[^25]

{{% notation title="New insights" %}}

Kisay's prominence in the Ulster network was genuinely shocking when I
first constructed both of these networks. A traditional close reading of
her account, which was longer lasting and included many more purchases
than most other individuals in her network, suggested that she would be
prominent. However, economic prominence did not always map onto social
prominence in either the Wendell or Ulster networks, so her connection
to so many other individuals and her significance was only apparent with
social network analysis.

{{% /notation %}}

Kisay's husband Arent Fynhout also appears as one of the more
influential members of the network, but less influential than Kisay
herself. As an exception to the general pattern of more influential
husbands and less influential wives in the Ulster network, Kisay and
Arent Fynhout offer an interesting counterpoint to the influence of
Haudenosaunee women documented in the Wendell network. Kisay traded on
her own account, her husband's account, and the accounts of others, and
the Dutch trader identified other Native people by reference to her much
more frequently than by reference to her husband. She is also one of
only two women in this network who were used as reference points for
male kin. Kisay and another much less prominent woman Kegkenond were
used to identify daughters, fathers, husbands, sisters, and daughters'
husbands who were otherwise unnamed, while other named and unnamed
Munsee men were identified by their connections to other men. Other
influential Native women in this network appear as adjuncts on their
husbands\' accounts, and were documented with many fewer connections
independent of their husbands\' connections. Whether Kisay's prominence
in this network was due to her own social capital, her large number of
kin, or some other factor is unclear, but she stands out starkly as the
exception to the general pattern of women's much lower influence in the
Ulster network compared to the Wendell network.[^26]

Munsee women's comparative lower influence is due in part to the
structure of the network, which features a large central component with
few subcommunities to be bridged. The lower average density of this
network compared to the Wendell network belies the density of
connections in the main cluster of the network. (See Table One) Whereas
the Wendell network is composed of interconnected hubs, the main
component of the Ulster network reveals dense connections between the
main hubs of the subnetworks centered on Kisay, Manonck, the Sawonossie,
and Hendrick Heckan. The Munsee, Esopus and Wappinger individuals who
purchased from the anonymous Dutch trader in the Ulster account book
performed day labor and defaulted on their debts at much higher rate
than did Evert Wendell's Haudenosaunee customers, an indication of the
greater impact of settler colonialism and reorientation of Native labor
patterns for Munsee people in the lower Hudson than in Iroquoia.[^27]

The structure of the Wendell and Ulster networks also suggest
corresponding limitations to settler colonial views of Indigenous
kinship ties. In the Wendell network, a few key figures served as
gatekeepers to European knowledge of Haudenosaunee kinship ties, as
indicated by the hub and bridge structure of the Wendell network with
several influential women included as hubs. The Ulster network, with its
more densely connected subnetworks, suggests that the Ulster trader had
fuller knowledge of connections between his Munsee customers, or at
least more frequently observed connections between them than did
Wendell. Though a few women such as Pitternel and Gertie function as
bridges in the Ulster network, men much more frequently occupy the role
of bridge between subnetworks, and the circular nature of the dense
connections in the Ulster network suggest that the anonymous Dutch
trader's view of his customers\' kinship and social ties was much less
mediated than was Wendell's.

As the Munsee were incorporated more fully into settler colonial
economic structures of debt and day labor, their kinship ties were made
more visible to the settler colonial archive as well. The difference in
the gendered structure of the roughly contemporary Haudenosaunee Wendell
network and Munsee Ulster network, documented in similar ways, suggest
that broader forces of economic and social colonialism shaped both
Indigenous kinship ties and settler colonial views of them. The greater
rate of debt default and daylabor among the Munsee, coupled with the
denser structure of the network and women's less prominent place within
it, suggests a correspondence between the invisibility of Native women
and the visibility of Indigenous networks in the settler colonial
archive. Although at first glance paradoxical, the decreasing visibility
of Native women as their kin and social networks became more visible is
the process of archival erasure as a product of colonialism.

The work for this project began as an attempt to simply keep track of
who was related to who, but as the connections multiplied it became
clear that Wendell and the Ulster trader saw the individuals they traded
with as deeply enmeshed in their social context, at times even
inseparable from their social context because of the need to identify
individuals by their relationships. Social network analysis, with its
utility to zoom out and examine the network as a whole, seemed at first
blush the perfect fit for this accumulation of individual connections.
However, digital humanities methods, like traditional historical and
ethnohistorical methods, rely on a limited settler colonial archive. As
a way of analyzing and critiquing the limits of the archive itself and
the utility of the settler colonial archive as a site of study for
Indigenous kinship ties, social network analysis might be one mode of
reading against the grain in ways made familiar by ethnohistorians.
Networks of necessarily tiny data do not reveal the complete structures
of Indigenous kinship networks, but rather the parts of those networks
made visible to settlers and the ways in which colonialism shaped the
perception of Indigenous social ties.

The nearly contemporaneous eighteenth century Wendell and Ulster
networks suggest that European access to and therefore the archival
visibility of Indigenous social ties was both a symptom and byproduct of
colonialism. Cultural, social and economic factors may account for
differences in the structural role of women and purchasing patterns
which brought Indigenous peoples into contact with the Dutch traders who
documented their kinship ties. The Munsee, integrated into Anglo-Dutch
economic networks by debt and day labor to a much greater extent than
the contemporary Haudenosaunee, had much more dense social ties
documented through the process of their exchange with the Ulster trader.
The process of colonialism which brought Munsee and Haudenosaunee
families into economic contact with Dutch traders made their kinship
ties more or less visible. Structurally, these two contemporary networks
reveal cultural differences in the role of Native women tying together
Indigenous kinship networks, with Haudenosaunee women functioning both
as hubs of clusters and as bridges between clusters, where Munsee women
remained on the edges of their relatively dense subnetworks and ties
between men bridged clusters.

Haudenosaunee women's roles as bridges between inter-tribal
sub-communities has been under recognized because of the process of
archival erasure which constructed women as non-public actors. Women's
roles in bridging communities took place in small scale, economic,
social, and fictive kinship interactions rather than the more archivally
visible and masculine-coded diplomatic encounter. These connections
along the borders of Native and settler communities, as well as Native
women's and couples\' roles as go-betweens in the context of exchanges
suggests that Haudenosaunee women played a role in defining the social
borders of their communities in ways elided by the model of male
intercultural brokers or Native women's fur trade intermarriages.

Colonial perceptions of Indigenous women's roles within their own
communities suggests the limits of the settler colonial archive for
documenting the role of Indigenous women in their own families,
revealing both the colonialist epistemology and agnotology of Indigenous
kinship ties. Settler colonial perceptions of gender roles defined
Indigenous women through their male relations if acknowledging their
presence at all, limiting the archival documentation of Indigenous
kinship ties through a process of gradual erasure as Indigenous networks
became more visible to settler colonial view. The structure of
Haudenosaunee and Munsee social networks as recorded by Wendell and the
Ulster trader suggests that colonial observers perceived Indigenous
women as less influential within communities more deeply entangled in
colonial labor systems. While Haudenosaunee women were perceived as
bridges between sub-communities which operated mainly outside the sphere
of settler observation, Munsee women were perceived as marginalized
within their own communities as their communities lost political and
economic self-determination. Indigenous women's supposed declining
status and influence under colonialism may therefore be as much part of
the colonial archival process as a product of colonial restructuring of
lived experience.

[^1]: Evert Wendell, Kees-Jan Waterman, and Gunther Michelson, *"To Do
    Justice to Him & Myself": Evert Wendell's Account Book of the Fur
    Trade with Indians in Albany, New York, 1695-1726* (Philadelphia:
    American Philosophical Society, 2008), 36.

[^2]: For further discussion of the context and significance of the two
    account books, as well as notes regarding Indigenous individuals who
    do appear in other known records, see the published version of each.
    Evert Wendell, Kees-Jan Waterman, and Gunther Michelson, *"To Do
    Justice to Him & Myself": Evert Wendell's Account Book of the Fur
    Trade with Indians in Albany, New York, 1695-1726* (Philadelphia:
    American Philosophical Society, 2008); Kees-Jan Waterman, and J.
    Michael Smith. *Munsee Indian Trade in Ulster County, New York,
    1712-1732*. Syracuse, N.Y.: Syracuse University Press, 2013.

[^3]: Jon Parmenter, *The Edge of the Woods: Iroquoia 1534-1701* (East
    Lansing: Michigan State University Press, 2010), 257-266, 271-273;
    Matthew Dennis, *Cultivating a Landscape of Peace :
    Iroquois-European Encounters in Seventeenth-Century America* (Ithaca
    NY: Cornell University Press, 1993); David Preston, *The Texture of
    Contact: European and Indian Settler Communities on the Frontiers of
    Iroquoia, 1667-1783* (Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press, 2009),
    23-26; Gail D MacLeitch, *Imperial Entanglements: Iroquois Change
    and Persistence on the Frontiers of Empire* (Philadelphia:
    University of Pennsylvania Press, 2011); Daniel K. Richter, *The
    Ordeal of the Longhouse: The Peoples of the Iroquois League in the
    Era of European Colonization*. (Chapel Hill: Published for the
    Institute of Early American History and Culture, by the University
    of North Carolina Press), 1992, 214-235; Richard Aquila, *The
    Iroquois Restoration: Iroquois Diplomacy on the Colonial Frontier,
    1701-1754*. Detroit: Wayne State University Press, 1983, 23-25.

[^4]: For an overview of the recent shifts in Iroquois studies both
    generally and with regard to women's roles, see Edward Countryman,
    "Toward a Different Iroquois History," *The William and Mary
    Quarterly* 69, no. 2 (2012): 249--353. For an overview of the
    traditional assessment of Iroquois women's political and familial
    roles, see Bonvillain 53-57 and Elisabeth Tooker, "Women in Iroquois
    Society," in Extending the Rafters, 1984; Barbara Alice Mann,
    Iroquoian Women: The Gantowisas (New York: P Lang, 2000). For a
    critique of the "mothers of the nation" framework with Iroquois
    women's roles limited to largely symbolic care work rather than
    direct involvement in governance, see Audra Simpson, *Mohawk
    Interruptus: Political Life Across the Borders of Settler States*
    (Durham: Duke University Press, 2014), 148; Audra Simpson, "Seven
    Generations of Iroquois Leadership: The Six Nations Since 1800
    (review)," *The American Indian Quarterly* 34, no. 2 (2010):
    274--79. For the "village and clearing" model of Iroquois women
    limited to homes and fields, see, for example, Daniel K. Richter,
    *Facing East from Indian Country: A Native History of Early America*
    (Cambridge, Mass.: Harvard University Press, 2001), 5; José António
    Brandão, *Your Fyre Shall Burn No More : Iroquois Policy toward New
    France and Its Native Allies to 1701* (Lincoln Neb.: University of
    Nebraska Press, 1997), 1 and 65; Tooker, "Women in Iroquois
    Society"; Anthony Wayne Wonderley and Hope Emily Allen, *Oneida
    Iroquois Folklore, Myth, and History: New York Oral Narrative from
    the Notes of H.E. Allen and Others* (Syracuse, N.Y.: Syracuse
    University Press, 2004), 7--8; William N. Fenton and Elisabeth
    Tooker, "Mohawk," in *Handbook of North American Indians*, ed.
    William C Sturtevant (Washington: Smithsonian Institution Press,
    1978), 466--80; Judith K. Brown, "Economic Organization and the
    Position of Women among the Iroquois," *Ethnohistory* 17, no. 3/4
    (1970): 151--67. This model has persisted despite several decades of
    critique. For critiques of the village and clearing framework, see
    Nancy Shoemaker, "The Rise or Fall of Iroquois Women," *Journal of
    Women's History*, 1991, 39--57; Devon A Mihesuah, "Commonalty of
    Difference: American Indian Women and History," *American Indian
    Quarterly* 20, no. 1 (1996): 15--27; Jo-Anne Fiske, "By, For, or
    about?: Shifting Directions in the Representations of Aboriginal
    Women," *Atlantis: Critical Studies in Gender, Culture and Social
    Justice* 25, no. 1 (2000): 12--13.

[^5]: Michele Mitchell, "Turns of the Kaleidoscope: 'Race,' Ethnicity,
    and Analytical Patterns in American Women's and Gender History,"
    *Journal of Women's History* 25, no. 4 (2013): 46--73; Robert
    Michael Morrissey, "Kaskaskia Social Network: Kinship and
    Assimilation in the French-Illinois Borderlands, 1695-1735,"
    *William and Mary Quarterly* 70, no. 1 (2013): 103--46; Brenda
    Macdougall, "Speaking of Metis: Reading Family Life into Colonial
    Records," *Ethnohistory* 61, no. 1 (2014): 27--56. For one case of a
    female diplomatic broker in eighteenth century Iroquoia, sometimes
    figured as exceptional rather than exemplary in the broader
    scholarly conversation, see Jon Parmenter, "Isabel Montour: Cultural
    Broker on the Frontiers of New York and Pennsylvania," in *The Human
    Tradition in Colonial America*, ed. Ian Kenneth Steele and Nancy L
    Rhoden (Wilmington, Del.: Scholarly Resources, 1999), 141--59;
    Alison Duncan Hirsch, "'The Celebrated Madame Montour':
    'Interpretress' Across Early American Frontiers," *Explorations in
    Early American Culture* 4 (2000): 81--112.

[^6]: This article follows the published version of the Ulster
    accountbook and other works in the use of Munsee as a cultural group
    related but distinct from the broader Delaware or Leni Lenape of
    southern New Jersey and eastern Pennsylvania, although the historic
    term Munsee was not used until 1727. See Waterman and Smith, 36n4;
    Jane T. Merritt, *At the Crossroads: Indians and Empires on a
    Mid-Atlantic Frontier*. Chapel Hill: University of North Carolina
    Press, 2003, 31-32 n13; Jane T. Merritt, "Cultural Encounters along
    a Gender Frontier: Mahican, Delaware, and German Women in
    Eighteenth-Century Pennsylvania." *Pennsylvania History: A Journal
    of Mid-Atlantic Studies* 67, no. 4 (2000): 502--31; J. Michael
    Smith, "The Seventeenth Century Sachems of the Wapping Country:
    Ethnic Identity and Interaction in the Hudson River Valley," in *The
    Journey: An Algonquian Peoples Seminar, Selected Research Papers,
    2003-2004*, ed Shirley W Dunn (Albany: New York State Musem, 2009),
    39-67. For a differing interpretation, see Marshall J. Becker,
    "Lenopi; Or, What's in a Name? Interpreting the Evidence for
    Cultural Boundaries in the Lower Delaware Valley," *Bulletin of the
    Archaeological Society of New Jersey*, no. 63 (2008): 11-32. For the
    presence of Munsee communities in the lower Hudson Valley region,
    see Waterman and Smith, 9-11 and 39n24-25; Paul Otto, *The
    Dutch-Munsee Encounter in America: The Struggle for Sovereignty in
    the Hudson Valley*. New York: Berghahn Books, 2006, 18; Herbert C.
    Kraft, *The Lenape-Delaware Indian Heritage: 10,000 BC to AD 2000*
    (Stanhope, NJ: Lenape Books, 2001) 428-429, 440; James D Folts, "The
    Westward Migration of the Munsee Indians in the Eighteenth Century,"
    in *The Challenge: An Algonquian Peoples Seminar*, ed. Shirley W
    Dunn (Albany: New York State Museum, 2005), 34. For Munsee
    population and colonial pressures, see Robert S. Grumet, *First
    Manhattans: A History of the Indians of Greater New York*. Norman:
    University of Oklahoma Press, 2011, 164-165; Robert S. Grumet, *The
    Munsee Indians: A History*. Norman: University of Oklahoma Press,
    2009, 208-213; Otto, 163-164, 175-176. For quote, see Merrit 2003,
    53.

[^7]: For women's changing roles among the Delaware of Pennsylvania, see
    Merritt, 2003, 51, 53-56, 74-75, 131, 143-144, 151-156; Merritt,
    2000: 502--31; Gunlög Fur, *A Nation of Women: Gender and Colonial
    Encounters Among the Delaware Indians*. Philadelphia: University of
    Pennsylvania Press, 2012, 4-5, 18-20 and 107-127 *passim* for
    Moravian missionaries' use of and anxiety regarding Delaware women's
    kinship networks. On Munsee women's roles, see Robert S. Grumet,
    "That Their Issue Be Not Spurious: An Inquiry into Munsee
    Matriliny," *Bulletin of the Archaeological Society of New Jersey*
    45 (1990): 22; Robert Grumet, "Sunksquaws, Shamans, and Tradeswomen:
    Middle Atlantic Coastal Algonkian Women during the 17th and 18th
    Centuries." In *Women and Colonization: Anthropological
    Perspectives*, edited by Mona Etienne and Eleanor Burke Leacock. New
    York: Praeger, 1980; Otto, 15; Grumet 2009, 11-15, 364-365n4-6. For
    "adaptive capacity," see Merritt 2003, 52 and Kathleen Brown, "The
    Anglo-Algonquian Gender Frontier." In *Negotiators of Change:
    Historical Perspectives on Native American Women*, ed. Nancy
    Shoemaker. New York: Routledge, 1995, 26--48. For rhetorical
    constructions of the Delaware as women, see Grumet 2009, 203-205;
    Merritt, 219-223; Fur, 160-198 *passim*.

[^8]: In the Wendell account book, women participated on 49.6% of all
    accounts and were sole account holders on 20% of accounts. In the
    Ulster account book, women participated on 51.6% of all accounts and
    were sole account holders on 22% of accounts. Waterman and Smith,
    12, 19 and 47; Wendell, Waterman and Michelson, 17-18, 26-33, 196.
    For the intersection of land loss, debt, and political
    disenfranchisement for other Native groups, see Jean M. O'Brien,
    *Dispossession by Degrees : Indian Land and Identity in Natick,
    Massachusetts, 1650-1790*. Cambridge; New York, NY, USA: Cambridge
    University Press, 1997; Richard White, *The Roots of Dependency :
    Subsistence, Environment, and Social Change among the Choctaws,
    Pawnees, and Navajos*. Lincoln: University of Nebraska Press, 1983;
    David J. Silverman, "The Impact of Indentured Servitude on the
    Society and Culture of Southern New England Indians, 1680-1810."
    *The New England Quarterly.* 74, no. 4 (2001): 622.

[^9]: Cole Harris, "How Did Colonialism Dispossess? Comments from an
    Edge of Empire." *Annals of the Association of American Geographers*
    94, no. 1 (2004): 165--82; Mark Rifkin, *Settler Common Sense:
    Queerness and Everyday Colonialism in the American Renaissance*.
    Minneapolis: Univ Of Minnesota Press, 2014; Lorenzo Veracini,
    *Settler Colonialism: A Theoretical Overview*. 2010. New York:
    Palgrave Macmillan, 2010; Lorenzo Veracini, "'Settler Colonialism':
    Career of a Concept." *The Journal of Imperial and Commonwealth
    History* 41, no. 2 (June 1, 2013): 313--33.
    doi:10.1080/03086534.2013.768099; Patrick Wolfe, *Settler
    Colonialism*. New York: A&C Black, 1999.

[^10]: For examples of decline narratives in the literature of Iroquoia,
    see Robert Grumet, *Historic Contact* (Norman OK: University of
    Oklahoma Press, 1995), 346; Anthony Wallace, *The Death and Rebirth
    of the Seneca* (New York: Knopf, 1970), 23; Daniel K. Richter, *The
    Ordeal of the Longhouse: The Peoples of the Iroquois League in the
    Era of European Colonization* (Chapel Hill: University of North
    Carolina Press, 1992), 260--261; Timothy J. Shannon, *Indians and
    Colonists at the Crossroads of Empire: The Albany Congress of 1754*
    (Ithaca, N.Y.: Cornell University Press, 2000), 26--27; Diane
    Rothenberg, "The Mother of the Nation: Seneca Resistance to Quaker
    Intervention," in *Women and Colonization: Anthropological
    Perspectives*, ed. Mona Etienne and Eleanor Burke Leacock (New York:
    Praeger, 1980), 82. For critiques of this approach in the broader
    scholarship of Native North America, see Jennifer M Spear, "The
    Distant Past of North American Women's History," *Journal of Women's
    History* 16, no. 4 (2004): 41--49; Gwenn A. Miller, "Contact and
    Conquest in Colonial North America," in *A Companion to American
    Women's History*, ed. Nancy A Hewitt (Oxford; Malden, MA: Blackwell,
    2002), 35--48; Michelle LeMaster, *Brothers Born of One Mother:
    British-Native American Relations in the Colonial Southeast*
    (Charlottesville: University of Virginia Press, 2012). On the recent
    scholarship on the eighteenth century development of Anglophone
    public vs. private spheres, see Mary Beth Norton, *Separated by
    Their Sex: Women in Public and Private in the Colonial Atlantic
    World* (Ithaca: Cornell University Press, 2011); Terri L. Snyder,
    "Refiguring Women in Early American History," *The William and Mary
    Quarterly* 69, no. 3 (2012): 421--50. On the difficulties of
    documenting Native women's presence in masculine-coded diplomatic
    spaces, see MacLeitch; Fur, *A Nation of Women,* 4-5.

[^11]: On the potentials of big data for historians and other humanists,
    as well as general concerns in big-data projects, see Lev Manovich,
    "Trending: The Promises and Challenges of Big Social Data," in
    *Debates in the Digital Humanities*, ed. Matthew K Gold
    (Minneapolis: Univ Of Minnesota Press, 2012),
    http://dhdebates.gc.cuny.edu/debates/text/15; Katharina Hering,
    "Digital Historiography and the Archives," *Journal of Digital
    Humanities*, November 1, 2014,
    http://journalofdigitalhumanities.org/3-2/digital-historiography-and-the-archives/;
    Jo Guldi and David Armitage, *The History Manifesto* (Cambridge:
    Cambridge University Press, 2014), 66--116 passim; Graham, Shawn,
    Ian Milligan, and Scott Weingart. *Exploring Big Historical Data:
    The Historian's Macroscope*. Reprint edition. London: Imperial
    College Press, 2015 1-36 and 195-264. For a general overview of the
    practice of social network analysis by computer scientists and
    humanists, see Thomas Peace, "Six Degrees to Phillip Buckner? An
    Accessible Introduction to Network Analysis and Its Possibilities
    for Atlantic Canadian History." *Acadiensis* 44, no. 1 (May 1,
    2014).
    [https://journals.lib.unb.ca/index.php/Acadiensis/article/view/23130](https://journals.lib.unb.ca/index.php/Acadiensis/article/view/23130);
    David Easley and Jon Kleinberg, *Networks, Crowds, and Markets:
    Reasoning about a Highly Connected World* (New York: Cambridge
    University Press, 2010), 16--17; Scott B. Weingart, "Demystifying
    Networks, Parts I & II," *Journal of Digital Humanities*, March 15,
    2012,
    http://journalofdigitalhumanities.org/1-1/demystifying-networks-by-scott-weingart/;
    Stanley Wasserman and Katherine Faust, *Social Network Analysis
    Methods and Applications* (Cambridge; New York: Cambridge University
    Press, 1994); "8000 Canadians." *Exploring Big Historical Data: The
    Historian's Macroscope*, February 12, 2015.
    [http://www.themacroscope.org/2.0/8000-canadians/](http://www.themacroscope.org/2.0/8000-canadians/);
    "Dynamic Networks in Gephi." *Exploring Big Historical Data: The
    Historian's Macroscope*, September 19, 2015.
    [http://www.themacroscope.org/2.0/dynamic-networks-in-gephi/](http://www.themacroscope.org/2.0/dynamic-networks-in-gephi/).
    Network analysis maps relationships between many kinds of "stuff,"
    including things, places, ideas and people. See Weingart,
    "Demystifying Networks, Parts I & II."

[^12]: Michel-Rolph Trouillot, *Silencing the Past: Power and the
    Production of History* (Boston: Beacon Press, 1995); E Folsom,
    "Database as Genre: The Epic Transformation of Archives," *PMLA*
    122, no. 5 (2007): 1571--79; Adeline Koh and Roopika Risam, "Open
    Thread: The Digital Humanities as a Historical 'Refuge' from
    Race/Class/Gender/Sexuality/Disability?," *Postcolonial Digital
    Humanities*, accessed July 1, 2015,
    http://dhpoco.org/blog/2013/05/10/open-thread-the-digital-humanities-as-a-historical-refuge-from-raceclassgendersexualitydisability/.

[^13]: On the practice of ethnohistory and "reading against the grain,"
    see Patricia Kay Galloway, *Practicing Ethnohistory: Mining
    Archives, Hearing Testimony, Constructing Narrative* (Lincoln:
    University of Nebraska Press, 2006); Michael E. Harkin,
    "Ethnohistory's Ethnohistory," *Social Science History* 34, no. 02
    (June 2010): 113--28; Amy den Ouden, "Locating the Cannibals:
    Conquest, North American Ethnohistory, and the Threat of
    Objectivity," *History and Anthropology* 18, no. 2 (2007): 101--33.
    On the creation of archival silence as an active process of
    colonialism, imperialism, and slavery, see Stephen Best, "Neither
    Lost nor Found: Slavery and the Visual Archive," *Representations*
    113, no. 1 (2011): 150--63; Saidiya Hartman, "Venus in Two Acts,"
    *Small Axe : A Journal of Criticism*, no. 26 (2008): 1--14; Susan
    Scott Parrish, "Rummaging / In and Out of Holds," *Early American
    Literature* 45, no. 2 (2010): 261--74. The phenomenon of colonial
    erasure or recasting of Indigenous histories is well known, but
    mainly examines the process of historical memory rather than erasure
    as an ongoing process from the moment of encounter. See for example
    Jill Lepore, *The Name of War: King Philip's War and the Origins of
    American Identity* (New York: Knopf, 1998), 277--240; Joanne
    Rappaport, *The Politics of Memory: Native Historical Interpretation
    in the Colombian Andes*, (Durham: Duke University Press Books,
    1998); Jean M. O'Brien, *Firsting and Lasting: Writing Indians out
    of Existence in New England*, (Minneapolis: University of Minnesota
    Press, 2010); Maureen Konkle, *Writing Indian Nations Native
    Intellectuals and the Politics of Historiography, 1827-1863* (Chapel
    Hill: University of North Carolina Press, 2004); Susan A. Miller,
    "Native Historians Write Back: The Indigenous Paradigm in American
    Indian Historiography," *Wicazo Sa Review* 24, no. 1 (2009): 25--45.
    For the erasure of women's influence in familial networks, see
    Silvia Van Kirk, *Many Tender Ties: Women in Fur Trade Society
    1670-1870*. Norman: University of Oklahoma Press, 1983; Gary C.
    Anderson, *Kinsmen of Another Kind: Dakota-White Relations in the
    Upper Mississippi Valley, 1650-1862*. First edition. St. Paul:
    Minnesota Historical Society Press, 1997; Jennifer S. H. Brown,
    *Strangers in Blood: Fur Trade Company Families in Indian Country*.
    Oklahoma paperbacks ed edition. Norman: University of Oklahoma
    Press, 1996; Susan Sleeper-Smith, *Indian Women and French Men:
    Rethinking Cultural Encounter in the Western Great Lakes*. First
    Edition. Amherst: University of Massachusetts Press, 2001.

[^14]: den Ouden, "Locating the Cannibals"; Lauren Klein, "The Image of
    Absence: Archival Silence, Data Visualization, and James Hemings,"
    *American Literature* 85, no. 4 (2013): 661--88; Alan Liu, "Where Is
    Cultural Criticism in the Digital Humanities?," in *Debates in the
    Digital Humanities*, ed. Matthew K Gold (Minneapolis: Univ Of
    Minnesota Press, 2012), 490--506,
    http://dhdebates.gc.cuny.edu/debates/text/15.

[^15]: Wendell, Waterman, and Michelson, *To Do Justice*, 37, 55, 74,
    101, 103. See the notes on individual entries in Wendell, Waterman,
    and Michelson; and Waterman and Smith for further discussion of how
    an individual's gender was determined and determining if separate
    entries referred to the same individual.

[^16]: For a sociological overview of the whole-network concept, see
    Christopher McCarty, "Structure in Personal Networks." *Journal of
    Social Structure* 3, no. 1 (2002).
    [https://www.cmu.edu/joss/content/articles/volume3/McCarty.html](https://www.cmu.edu/joss/content/articles/volume3/McCarty.html).
    For a whole-network approach to a mixed Indigenous-French social
    network, see Robert Michael Morrissey, "Archives of Connection,"
    *Historical Methods: A Journal of Quantitative and Interdisciplinary
    History* 48, no. 2 (2015): 67--79; Robert Michael, "Kaskaskia Social
    Network." For discussion of the spatial extent of colonial influence
    in the lives of Indigenous people and multi-scalar approaches to the
    study of colonialism, see Silliman, Stephen W. *Lost Laborers in
    Colonial California : Native Americans and the Archaeology of Rancho
    Petaluma*. Tucson: University of Arizona Press, 2004; Voss, Barbara
    L. *The Archaeology of Ethnogenesis : Race and Sexuality in Colonial
    San Francisco*. Berkeley: University of California Press, 2008;
    Jordan, Kurt. "Colonies, Colonialism and Cultural Entanglement: The
    Archeology of Postcolumbian Intercultural Relations." In
    *International Handbook of Historical Archeology*, edited by
    Teresita Majewskiand and David Gaimster. New York: Springer, 2009.

[^17]: This value expresses the ratio of connections in the network to
    the number of all possible connections in a maximally dense network
    in which all individuals are connected to all other individuals. A
    value of 1 indicates the network is maximally dense; a higher
    density indicates that the network is closer to maximally dense.

[^18]: Network diameter indicates the shortest path between the two most
    distant individuals and an indicator of how many steps would be
    required to cross the network.

[^19]: The clustering coefficient is an indicator of a "small world"
    network. The higher the value, the more interconnected neighborhoods
    within the network are, while a lower value indicates that neighbors
    share fewer connections.

[^20]: Wendell, Waterman, and Michelson, *To Do Justice*, passim. See
    the annotations in Wendell, Waterman and Michelson for notes on
    likely identifications of some of these Native individuals in land
    deeds and other records. Very few of these other written sources
    documented specific connections to other Native individuals, and so
    were not incorporated in building this network.

[^21]: Wendell, Waterman and Michelson, \[83\] and \[100\].

[^22]: Ibid.; Deborah A Rosen, "Women and Property across Colonial
    America: A Comparison of Legal Systems in New Mexico and New York,"
    *The William and Mary Quarterly* 60, no. 2 (2003): 369, 377; Serena
    R Zabin, "Women's Trading Networks and Dangerous Economies in
    Eighteenth-Century New York City," *Early American Studies: An
    Interdisciplinary Journal* 4, no. 2 (2006): 293; Linda Briggs
    Biemer, *Women and Property in Colonial New York: The Transition
    from Dutch to English Law 1643-1727* (Ann Arbor, Mich.: UMI Research
    Press, 1983).

[^23]: Weingart, "Demystifying Networks, Parts I & II."

[^24]: Waterman and Smith, *Munsee Indian Trade*. For differences in
    purchasing patterns between the Wendell and Ulster account books,
    see Ibid., 13--15 and 35.

[^25]: Waterman and Smith, *Munsee Indian Trade*, 13--15; Fur, *A Nation
    of Women*; Amy C Schutt, *Peoples of the River Valleys: The Odyssey
    of the Delaware Indians* (Philadelphia: University of Pennsylvania
    Press, 2007).

[^26]: Waterman and Smith, *Munsee Indian Trade*, 222n289--291.

[^27]: Ibid., 34--35. See also David J. Silverman, "The Impact of
    Indentured Servitude on the Society and Culture of Southern New
    England Indians, 1680-1810," *The New England Quarterly.* 74, no. 4
    (2001): 622. on the colonial impact of debt and day labor in Native
    communities.
