---
title: "Itinerating Europe: "
weight: 3
subtitle:  Early Modern Spatial Networks in Printed Itineraries, 1545-1700
doi: http://thelinktothisarticlehere
author: 
- name: Rachel Midura
  affiliation: Virginia Tech
  email: rmidura@vt.edu
citation:
- author: Midura, Rachel
  title: "Itinerating Europe: Early Modern Spatiial Networks in Printed Itineraries, 1545-1700"
  journal: Journal of Social History
  year: 2021
  volume: 54
  issue: 4
  pages: 1-41
  doi: http://doi.org/10.1093/jsh/shab011

---

{{% headnote title="Headnote" %}}

Printed itinerary books featuring lists of cities and relative distances
were a key resource for cosmopolitan travelers of the sixteenth through
eighteenth centuries. This article applies Social Network Analysis (SNA)
to a new bibliography of eighty-four itinerary books to illustrate a
common "mental map" of routes and the impact of infrastructure, war, and
cartography.

{{% /headnote %}}

**Introduction**[^1]


{{% notation title= "Project Origin" %}}

Ottavio Codogno's itinerary books were my first exposure to the
itinerary book genre. I came across the title in the process of
preparing my dissertation prospectus on the development of European
postal systems. While my dissertation relies on Codogno's prose, the
route tables were difficult to read using the same techniques,
especially once I discovered other similar titles for comparison and
contrast to Codogno's selection of routes.

{{% /notation %}}



In 1608, the Spanish postmaster lieutenant Ottavio Codogno took his
professional expertise to a Milanese publisher, producing *A New
Itinerary of Posts Throughout the World* (*Nuovo itinerario delle poste
del mondo*).[^2] The *New Itinerary* detailed the pan-European system of
waystations (*poste*) and riders in relay that had expanded from
Northern Italy from the fifteenth century. The book showcased Codogno's
expert knowledge of routes from Madrid to Vienna, and Rome to Brussels,
listing over two hundred examples for the use of couriers,
administrators, travelers, and correspondents. The "Posts from Genoa to
Mantua" or "Posts from Turin to Lyon, by the shortest road" listed
locations in sequence with occasional comments on local attractions or
political boundaries. In 1623, Codogno revised the itinerary under a new
title, "Compendium of the Posts" (*Compendio delle poste*), nearly
doubling the number of routes within. Yet the *New Itinerary* and
*Compendium* remained physically small books intended to be carried
comfortably on the road.

{{% notation title= "Historiographic Intervention" %}}

I was initially concerned with demonstrating how individual titles have
been used in postal historiography to date. It was more valuable to
point to the overall absence of consideration of such reference works as
an international phenomenon, due to the natural limitations of
close-reading and individual, physical consultation. The final version
of the article broadens my historiographical intervention from a history
of postal infrastructure towards the history of reference books and
travel more broadly.

{{% /notation %}}

Codogno's books are most often referenced as direct windows on to the
history and administrative structure of the European posts in the
sixteenth and seventeenth centuries. Historians emphasize the novelty of
postal waystations and their implementation by the territorializing
early modern state. Wolfgang Behringer and Bruno Caizzi rely primarily
on Codogno's prose chapters to this end, referencing individual routes
from the tables to determine where post stations were located.[^3] In
*Europa Postale*, Clemente Fedele, Marco Gerosa, and Armando Serra
provide new biographical context for the enigmatic postal lieutenant,
including a map with routes and the number of posts recorded.[^4] Yet
the map represents both the 1608 and 1623 itineraries, obscuring the
substantial differences between the two editions and reinforcing the
itinerary books as objective geographical depictions.

{{% notation title="Iterative Searches" %}}

The miscellaneous applications of the term itinerarium became clear once
I started to systematically search for other itinerary books in the road
table format on union catalogues, often by using "itinerar\*" in the
title field of chronologically-bound queries. I was already performing
similar searches for "roads\'\' and "posts" in various European
languages. With time, I included more regional variants such as the many
spellings of the German "wegweiser." While the mention of "roads" or
"posts" in the title increased the likelihood of a route table format
versus a prose guidebook, there is no way to be completely sure without
consulting a digitized or physical copy in many cases. I erred on the
side of excluding any itinerary that I could not ascertain to include
route tables.

{{% /notation %}}

The *Nuovo itinerario* and *Compendio* need to be recontextualized in
burgeoning early modern itinerary book production. Before the advent of
modern cartography, the itinerary book was the pinnacle of geographic
knowledge. The term *itinerarium* referred to a listing of cities with
their relative distances such as the famous Roman Antonine itinerary of
Britain.[^5] Christian pilgrimage itineraries of the Middle Ages, such
as Mathew Paris' *Chronica Majora* (c.1250)*,* combined lists of cities
with innovative fold-out maps. By the sixteenth century, the term
encompassed a variety of travel guides, road charts, and miscellaneous
collections of maps, observations, and navigational instructions.[^6]
Itinerary books structured the European conceptualization and navigation
of space through the eighteenth century, and yet have rarely been
studied as a text technology and international knowledge project.[^7]
Works that do consider itineraries comparatively are bounded by single
nationalities, consulting the books as direct windows on to contemporary
postal and road infrastructure, and thereby missing the international
landscape of the genre.[^8] Agents and brokers of various professions---
from state postmasters, to humanist printers and religious renegades---
supplemented their varied incomes by publishing itinerary books, often
in a characteristic route table format, and referring to a common canon
of geographic knowledge.

{{% notation title="Project Influences" %}}

I was especially steeped in the outcomes of the Mapping the Republic of
Letters project at Stanford, a collaboration that also involved the
Oxford Cultures of Knowledge project. See:
<http://republicofletters.stanford.edu/> and
<http://www.culturesofknowledge.org/>.

{{% /notation %}}

Printed itineraries ferried the mail, bodies, and imaginations of a
broad European readership. Much of what is known about early modern
travel and exchange derives from the vast personal archives of
exceptionally cosmopolitan individuals, such as Galileo Galilei
(1564-1642), Nicolas-Claude Fabri de Peiresc (1580-1637), Samuel Hartlib
(1600-1662), or Athanasius Kircher (1602-1680).[^9] By the middle of the
sixteenth century, a wide reading public had access to key information
for navigating networks of couriers, carriages, roads and post stations,
from the hubs of Milan, Brussels, and Innsbruck, to Moscow,
Constantinople and the New World.[^10] The itineraries demonstrate the
key role played by postal hubs that did not leave as distinctive a mark
on correspondence collections and newspaper production, such as Milan,
Leipzig and Dresden.[^11]

{{% notation title= "Takeaways" %}}

As chains of directional relationships, the routes were readily
interpretable as a network model without prioritizing real geographic
proximity as the primary organization. I could then pull out many
individual metrics representing the fates of individual cities over
time, but grouping these into a coherent analysis remained trickier.
Reconciling a seemingly disparate set of observations remained a
challenge at this stage of the article, and in network analysis as a
humanistic methodology. In the final version, I focused on the overall
characteristics and periodization of pre- and post-Westphalian European
systems, emphasizing the advent of consensus on a canon of routes, and
followed by the dissipation of the same.

{{% /notation %}}

The route corpus illustrates the impact of geopolitical shifts on a
European "mental map" of land-based travel. The period in question ---
from 1545 to 1700 --- encompassed the revolutions brought by the late
Reformation, the Thirty Years War (1618-1648), and the beginning of the
Enlightenment. Itinerary production preceded and followed the Peace of
Westphalia (1648), long associated with the birth of a modern world
system, allowing for the fruitful study of historic events on popular
geographic knowledge.[^12] Interpreting cities as nodes and routes as
links in an imagined network demonstrates long-term trends. Network
analysis visually and quantitatively highlights anomalies, prompting
further inquiry into notable presences and absences--- see, for example,
the surprising absences of Dutch itinerary production, and the relative
conceptual distance of Spain from a network which it had played a
disproportionate role in creating.[^13] The route corpus indicates that
the mental map saw its most radical shifts several decades after
Westphalia, and suggests a greater impact by formal cartography on
European perceptions of geopolitical space.

Reading across itinerary books demonstrates the collaborative,
transnational development of the genre. Itinerary creators inherited a
canon of routes from the late middle ages and gradually shifted their
selections until the overall network more closely resembled a modern
topography. Mapping the total corpus of routes is simplistic:
flightpath-like connections apply the modern processes by which we
encounter, interpret, and navigate travel and information
infrastructure. The itineraries co-existed with, but functionally
differed from maps: instead of a bird's eye view of political and
geographic topology, they presented cities as semi-spatial, abstract
concepts and connections. As Shawn Graham writes about Roman
itineraries, "...the itineraries are not simple lists: they are records
of journeys, both real and potential... they are the static presentation
of dynamic relationships between the towns listed."[^14] Itinerary
creators looked outwards on the world from a fixed viewpoint, building
it into the hierarchies by which they organized the routes.[^15] They
borrowed routes from contemporaries and predecessors, occasionally
adapting them to appeal to new audiences. Characterizing the archetypal
itinerary reveals an overall incorporative, collaborative process of
itinerary creation.[^16] The readers of itineraries, who often belonged
to the same class of itinerant administrators, also made the itineraries
their own: they leafed across its indexes, planned their journeys, chose
between alternatives, corrected information, and documented their own
stops and travel experiences on the pages.[^17]

{{% notation title="Technological Limitations" %}}

While it is my eventual goal to work with the content information
located beneath the route heading, including the number of posts on a
given route, the itineraries have proved difficult for Optimal Character
Recognition Technology. The irregular table structures, mixed quality
photographs, ample marginalia, and occasionally damaged texts have
necessitated hand entry to date. The Transkribus software developed by
the University of Innsbruck has been revolutionary, and I am now at work
training both layout and text recognition models tailored for the
itineraries.

{{% /notation %}}

{{< figure src="/img/Midura1a.png" title="Fig. 1a:" alt="Page from Ottavio Codogno's Nuovo intinerario" caption="Page from Ottavio Codogno’s Nuovo itinerario, with manuscript reader additions. Journeys are organized by headings, generally consisting of an origin and a destination (see “Poste da Augusta a Colonia”, or “Posts from Augsburg to Cologne.”) The list beneath provides all intermediary postal waystations with their respective distance in posts (“p.I”)." >}}

{{% notation title="Dropped Figure" %}}

This figure, 1b, is emblematic of the overwhelming impulse to throw
routes on a map, despite the difficulty of representing real geography
with solely the header data. While these visualizations demonstrate the
scope of the routes and areas of particular density, such as northern
Italy, they also represent exactly the flyover mentality from which I
wish to distance myself. Ultimately, I decided against including this
figure in the final version, as it was too easily interpreted as an
endorsement of the visualization, and was perhaps serving as a straw man
in any case.

{{% /notation %}}

{{< figure src="/img/Midura1b.png" title="Fig. 1b:" alt="Map of edges indicated in Nuovo itinerario" caption="Map of all edges indicated by the headings of Nuovo itinerario. The map overlays the network approach on geographic space, drawing a single direct connection between origin, intermediaries as listed in the route heading, and destination. The page shown in 1a appears as a single link between Augsburg and Cologne." >}}

{{% notation title= "Building Data" %}}

I compiled the database over the course of the past four years,
hand-entering itineraries as I came across them during my dissertation
research. Digital editions available from Google and Bavarian State
Library have been particularly valuable. The database itself is a set of
relational tables which I primarily access through Google Sheets. Tab
and Comma Separated Data (.tsv or .csv formats) allow for smooth
movement between different visualization programs.

{{% /notation %}}

Based on more than 70 published itineraries, the Early Modern Digital
Itineraries database consists of close to 3,500 unique routes connecting
more than 1,500 cities. The use of digital approaches for the history of
the book has long facilitated the distant reading of text corpora to
identify patterns in the early modern print industry.[^18] Several
projects, from the Nolli Map of Rome to The Map of Early Modern London
have utilized digital mapping to operationalize early modern
cartographic sources.[^19] In some cases, such as *ORBIS: The Stanford
Geospatial Network Model of the Roman World*, scholars layer additional
data to distort cartographic space, prioritizing the representation of
cost and difficulty of travel over geographic distance.[^20] This
project focuses instead on the abstracted space of the itineraries,
which bore a complex relationship to both geographic and experiential
realities. The organization of locations into select lists introduced
hierarchy, directionality, and centrality to the communication of
routes. Network models bridge the gap between textual sources and
cartographic representations, acknowledging the impact of real
geography, but not assuming its primacy in the inclusion, modification,
and ordering of routes.

The history of the itinerary paints a rich canvas of changing European
space, travel, and communication. The modern traveler can easily
underestimate the value of accurate, reliable international geographic
knowledge; in the sixteenth- and seventeenth centuries, few individuals
could lay claim to comprehensive expertise. It was the collaborative
project of a diverse cast of agents that itinerated Europe at least a
century before cartographers could lay claim to the task. The accuracy
and reliability of the postal itineraries could be suspect, but the
*accessibility* was nothing less than a revolution, brought about by the
building of new infrastructures, the professionalization of cosmopolitan
knowledge brokers in many guises, and the wildfire growth of the
printing press and ephemeral reference literature.[^21]

{{% notation title="Data Structure"%}}

The dataset consists of a series of relational tables: an edition, a
location, an overview, a route, and an edge table. The edition table
preserves the bibliographic information of each edition (allowing for
visualizations such as figure 2), while the location table consists of
the GeoNames coordinates for each location that appears within the route
headers of the database. The overview table has a single row for each
entry, meaning each incidence of a route header within each edition
within the database. The route table aggregates these entries by the
locations and directionality (Paris to London via Calais, for example),
while the edge table breaks each route down into its constituent
one-to-one relations between included locations (Paris to London, Paris
to Calais, Calais to London). The first edge of a route (origin to final
destination) is the least geographically important given that the
information is repeated in the second and third edges but reveals an
important conceptual link. It is designated by a 0 in the sequence index
and can be filtered from analysis. Everything stems from the
"Route_Description" column of the overview table, which represents a
fairly straightforward set of transcriptions of all headers under
consideration. I have provided an image below that includes the
interpretation of the page shown in figure 1a in the Overview, Route,
and Edge tables (shown in Google Sheets).

{{< figure src="/img/Midura-Data-Structure1.png" alt="Data in Google Sheet" >}}

{{< figure src="/img/Midura-Data-Structure2.png" alt="Data in Google Sheet" >}}

{{% /notation %}}

While the term "itinerary" was used by a variety of books, including
many prose accounts, the chosen examples follow the established formula
of a header describing a journey ("Rome to Milan") followed by a list of
intermediary cities. The resulting database distinguishes between a
"route," meaning an abstracted connection between an origin, a
destination and possible intermediaries ("Rome to Paris via Milan"), and
an "edge," meaning a one-to-one relationship between locations ("Rome to
Paris", "Rome to Milan," and "Milan to Paris"). Every effort has been
made to preserve the original directionality as published,
distinguishing between "Rome to Paris", and "Paris to Rome", for
example.[^22]

The benefits to reading across the itineraries in this matter are
multifold. First, it highlights the correspondence between the
itineraries, reflecting the incorporative process of their production
and use. Points of convergence, and anomalous cases, demonstrate the
push-pull forces of different conceptual structures of space. Second, as
historians of print have demonstrated, the material organization of
information offers valuable insight as to the intent of the creator, and
the perceived needs of the audience.[^23] Interventions reveal important
shifts in knowledge regimes. To put it another way, itinerary creators
and their readers shared a new mental map: centers grew and shrunk,
directionality flipped, and the margins became the core of the conceived
European network. The itineraries were never a perfect mirror of real
change; producers like Codogno used the imperfect information that they
had available. Third, the consideration of itineraries as a genre
recognizes the propagandizing power of postmasters and postal
itineraries, as they grew to dominate itinerary production. Postal
officials like Codogno had a real economic interest in emphasizing the
reliability and accessibility of the subnetworks that they oversaw,
particularly promoting them over historical routes with rival,
entrenched local carriers.[^24] Yet the sum effect of many small
interventions --- and occasional complete reworkings --- produced new
models of European space, communicating them to a wide readership. By
reading the itineraries as a collective corpus, we provide a new
periodization for the impact of shifting travel and exchange networks
across the early modern period on the overall conception of a connected
Europe.[^25]

**Genome of a Genre**

The 70 itineraries analyzed here are not an exhaustive survey of the
genre, but do represent its overall diversity of authors, languages,
times and places of publication. The peak of itinerary production within
the corpus was from the 1590s-1620s, with new editions of Daniel
Wintzenberger's *Reisebüchlein* (1595, 1598), Giovanni dal'Herba &
Cherubino Stella's *Itinerario* (1598), Ottavio Codogno's *Nuovo
itinerario* and *Compendio delle poste* (1608, 1611, 1616, 1623),
Theodore de Mayenne-Turquet's *Sommaire description* (1604, 1605) and
others.[^26] Itineraries were published across Europe, although there is
an interesting overall absence of publication from the Netherlands,
especially given its role as an early headquarters for the Thurn und
Taxis family of postal administrators.[^27] If Dutch itineraries were in
circulation, we would expect to see English-language authors drawing
from them, and yet these itineraries were generally translations of
German and Italian examples.[^28] Franciscus Schottus' *Itinerari
Italiae* (1600) had notably originated in the Netherlands, and continued
to be produced there, yet listed routes were only ever added by Italian
publishers.[^29] This absence could be due to continued warfare in the
Netherlands, making such geographic information more protected, akin to
that of the New World. It may also be indicative of a Dutch reliance on
travel by sea, as the itineraries by and large focused on land routes
utilized by travelers and couriers. A similar absence holds true across
the Baltic, despite significant advances in Swedish postal
infrastructure.[^30]

{{% notation title= "Comparing Itineraries" %}}

The best way of finding commonalities among the itineraries was to
construct an adjacency table (shown in Google Sheets) where each common
route adds 1 to the cell located at the intersection of the editions
shown in the row and column names. Itineraries attributed to the same
author (indicated by the initials prior to the year of publication in
the Edition ID) are most likely to share a high proportion of routes. I
also experimented with using dendrograms to represent this "genealogy,"
but it largely communicated information that could otherwise be
reasonably inferred, such as the similarity between editions of the same
title and of itinerary creators of the same nationality (produced in R).

{{< figure src="/img/Midura-Comparing-Itineraries.png" alt="Itineraries adjacecy table in Google Sheets" >}}

{{% /notation %}}

Distant reading of the routes highlights the relationships between
itineraries, indicating which books had disproportionate, transnational
impact over time.[^31] Routes from Dal'Herba's & Stella's *Itinerario
delle poste* (1562), for example, appeared in many future titles, from
Codogno's *Nuovo itinerario* (1608), to Italian editions of Franciscus
Schottus' *Itinerario overo nova descrittione* (1610), and even English
"Ex-Jesuit" James Wadsworth's *European Mercury* (1641).[^32] The canon
consisted of several routes for crossing the Alps (from Trent to Vienna,
and Genoa to Lyon); tight groups of major Italian and Dutch cities
(Milan, Genoa, Rome, Venice and Naples; and Brussels, Antwerp, and
Ghent); and a series of Spanish routes around the royal court at
Valladolid. The exact wording of route headers such as "From Rome to
Naples by the road of Valmonte and the Algiere woods" --- which was
published by 5 authors in 21 editions --- makes coincidence
unlikely*.*[^33]

{{< figure src="/img/Midura-Figure2a.png" title="Fig. 2a:" alt="Map of itinerary publication locations." caption="Map and timeline indicating the publication place and date of included itineraries." >}}

{{% notation title= "Scope & Representation" %}}

The bibliography and database contain several itineraries published
after 1720, however they serve primarily as a point of contrast to the
earlier itineraries. As the histogram demonstrates, the database
currently is most comprehensive with regard to the seventeenth century.
I used Microsoft Tableau to produce these visualizations as it allowed
for the combination of maps and histograms in single dashboards. In the
final version, I have graphed both the total number of editions
identified for each location and year, as well as the number included
within the dataset. While I generally added any itinerary I was able to
consult in person or through a digitized version, I had made a special
effort to represent the temporal and geographic breadth of the
genre.

I selected the editions that are referred to most frequently in the
article, and that demonstrate a variety of republication proportions.
The relatively individual route compositions of Charles Estienne (CE)
and Giovanni Maria Vidari (GV) contrast to that of Theodore Mayenne
Turquet (TT), which was reproduced in its entirety by Gilbert-Saulnier
du Verdier (GS). The style of notation by initials and publication date
(occasionally followed by a letter to indicate one of multiple editions
in the same year, as in GH1598A) is a unique identifier (the Edition ID)
that allows for easily linking information across the relational tables
of the database.

{{% /notation %}}


{{< figure src="/img/Midura-Figure2b.png" title="Fig. 2b:" alt="Bar chart of Number and Proportion of Common Routes by Edition" caption="Bar chart of selection of itineraries demonstrating the number of routes as well as the proportion of routes appearing in an itinerary published by another author. Edition ID’s represent the initials and publication date of a given itinerary." >}}

The digital approach also brings to light the geographic scope of
collaboration. For example, while British renegade Richard Verstegan
indicated that his work was an agglomeration of a "German" itinerary, as
well as other French and Italian examples, we can say with some surety
that he was working from Georg Mayr's *Wegbüchlein* (1576).[^34] We can
also see important shifts within the work of single authors: Codogno's
*Nuovo itinerario* (1604) focused on the dal'Herba & Stella-derived
canon, but by the 1616 edition, it was significantly expanded, adding at
least 76 routes.[^35] Many of these new routes may have derived from
Augsburg schoolmaster Jörg Gail's *Raißbuechlin* (1563) and French
doctor's Theodore Mayenne's *Sommaire description* (1604).[^36] As
Mayenne had himself explicitly incorporated the entirety of French
publisher Charles Estienne's *Guide* (1563) --- and may also have
borrowed from the German Mayr's *Wegbüchlein---* Codogno's *Nuovo
itinerario* was the culmination of several decades of such international
collaboration.[^37] Overall, the number of commonalities among these
five titles is more than twice of that gained from random sampling
across the corpus: this suggests that their relationship was more than
the documentation of common infrastructure.[^38] Close reading of the
common routes provides further verification, with many of them
consisting of the same intermediary stops.

{{% notation title="Remembering the Sources" %}}

While the route tables themselves can offer further evidence as to
audiences, these questions are best supported by a combination of close
and distant reading as well as integrating the paratextual material of
the itineraries (such as the author's letter to the reader).

{{% /notation %}}

We see from this common genome the manner in which itinerary creators
read across existing works. In some cases, the process of incorporation
was explicit: see, for example, the *Suite of Roads in France, Spain and
Italy and other Places* (*La suite de la guide des chemins tant de
France, d\'Espagne, Italie et autre pays*) produced by publisher Benoit
Rigaud and his sons. The *Suite* combined Charles Estienne's *Guide*,
dal'Herba's *Itinerary*, and an additional set of routes for pilgrims
involving their native Lyon.[^39] In cases such as the English
itineraries, or the Italian republications of Schottus' *Itinerari,* the
translator also indicated their reliance on other books. These
compilations suggest that early modern readers had access to a variety
of such itineraries, even when located far from the original places of
publication. Itinerary publishers had a commercial reason to gather such
examples, but in many cases, they may already have done so as a result
of personal interest or professional imperative. Many occupations
---including but not limited to bookselling---required international
correspondence and knowledge of distribution networks.

{{% notation title="Terminology" %}}

I often use the term itinerary creator in the article to indicate both
the author and publisher. Both frequently intervened with regard to the
route tables, but it is not always clear who had the primary agency.

{{% /notation %}}

Yet the evidence that authors frequently republished routes with few
changes also provides an important caveat for the use of the itinerary
network as an exact proxy for real-world conditions. The routes in
dal'Herba & Stella, Schottus and Mayenne were republished with little
variation until well into the eighteenth century, despite ample
infrastructure shifts in the intervening period. A 1610 edition of
Schottus' *Itinerario* denoted a route from Milan to Brescia as "where
there were posts and now are not." In 1675, a new edition still lamented
the now long-absent posts.[^40] In other cases, single titles were
hugely reworked between editions. stretching the term "edition." Each
version of Estienne's *Guide* saw modifications, most significantly
between the 1552 and 1553 editions, when at least 40 routes were
modified from the original.[^41] Several titles saw complete reworkings
of their routes under new publishers in the eighteenth century,
including Franciscus' Schottus' *Itinerario*: Roman publisher
Michel'Angelo and Pier Vincenzo Rossi modified or added 13 routes of the
total 28 (46.4%), all of which were located in Italy.[^42] Occasionally,
creators seemed to target entirely new audiences: Wintzenberger's *Ein
Naw Reyse Büchlein* (1577) ("New Travel Booklet") and *Der Kramer und
Kauffleute Reysebüchlein* (1578) ( "The Agent and Merchant's Travel
Booklet") had no routes in common, although they covered similar
geography.[^43] Itinerary creators (whether the original authors, or
future publishers) did change routes as a response to shifting
infrastructure and audience demand. Modified editions and titles also
showed two general trends: first, they stretched the boundaries of the
original work in most directions. Second, they consolidated existing
routes in many cases, dropping shorter regional connections in favor of
longer-distance connections to capitals. These trends may indicate both
that itinerary creators received feedback on the inaccuracy of regional
routes in the intervening periods. They may also have sought to market
future editions to a more international clientele based on the success
of the first editions.[^44]

{{% notation title="Choices in Data Construction" %}}

I constructed the database with an aim to preserve as much of the
original meaning as possible, while avoiding reading in additional
layers. This approach is well modeled by the Grand Tour Explorer
project, which seeks to provide a "digital transformation" of a source
rather than an entirely renewed digital encyclopedia. (see
<https://grandtour.stanford.edu/>). Modality is very rarely (almost
never) indicated in the route headings, and so deduplication and
disambiguation would have required substantial intervention. My choice
of filters reflect my research questions, however the data remains
accessible for framing new questions in future iterations.

{{% /notation %}}

The form of the early modern itinerary lends itself well to the
construction of a network model of cities linked by these "imagined
journeys." Yet the construction of any network does require informed,
interpretative choices, particularly the selection of nodes as actors,
and a designated relationship between those actors as edges.[^45] At its
simplest, the itinerary network model presumes a single, directed
relationship for each route --- the journey from an origin point to a
destination. The introduction of intermediary locations in the route
heading adds another layer of complexity: while the road may remain the
same, the implied relationships of a route changes depending upon its
description as "Milan to Rome," "Rome to Milan," or "Rome to London (via
Milan)." I chose to distinguish between each of these variations,
however I did group all routes by their headers alone. Journeys from
Genoa to Barcelona by sea and by land, for example, will appear as a
single route: while problematic for a geographically accurate map, both
journeys establish a conceptual link between the abstracted cities for
the network model.

A comparison of a map and force-directed network visualization (Figures
3a-3c) demonstrates the strong influence of other factors than simply
geographic proximity in the structuring of the itinerary route corpus.
In Figure 3a, a force-directed graph layout positions nodes by
simulating the pulling forces of shared connections.[^46] The nodes have
been colored by modern nationality groupings to further indicate the
divergence from a modern mental map.[^47] In many cases, we do see
communities formed primarily by geographic proximity. Yet the most
abstracted model indicates a core of transnational routes between
cities, despite their relative geographic distance. For example, Spain
appears as a visible community in the non-spatial network, with
international travel largely branching to and from Madrid. France's
initial hierarchical structure breaks down, with Paris continuing to
structure the French network, but many French locations demonstrated to
be equally, or more often, connected to external locales. Nodes such as
London, Antwerp, and Augsburg are pulled from the margins to the
conceptual core of the corpus network, despite the geographic distance
of the cities from their network neighbors.[^48] Instead of spatial
positioning, this model privileges the number of connections drawn by
the itinerary creators as a proxy for closeness.

{{% notation title="Visualization Platforms" %}}

This network visualization was produced within Gephi using the Geolayout
plugin (<https://gephi.wordpress.com/tag/geolayout/>). While possible to
do in R, I found that Gephi offered the most flexibility for producing a
visually similar spatial and non-spatial network models. It is not an
exact geographic layout- slight changes have been made to ease scale and
legibility, such as reducing the distance between Constantinople and
Italy. I chose a subset of cities to label across the visualizations
based on which show interesting change over time and help convey a sense
of geography, even in the non-spatial network layouts.

{{% /notation %}}

{{< figure src="/img/Midura-Figure3a.png" title="Fig. 3a:" alt="A spatial network of all edges as published by multiple authors" caption="A spatial network of all edges as published by multiple authors, colored by modern nationality." >}}

{{% notation title="Refining Visualizations" %}}

The use of a subsection here and a highlighting box in figure 6c were
both suggested in the course of workshopping this paper as means of
better conveying arguments using the network model. Network
visualizations have gained a certain notoriety as "hairballs" meaning
that they convey interconnectedness and little else to a reader. A
visual language of color, labeling, layout and juxtaposition helps to
overcome these shortcomings. See Scott Weingart, "Demystifing Networks,"
[scottbott.net](http://scottbott.net), Dec 14 2011, at
<http://www.scottbot.net/HIAL/index.html@p=6279.html>.

{{% /notation %}}

{{< figure src="/img/Midura-Figure3b.png" title="" alt="A forced-directed network layout" >}} {{< figure src="/img/Midura-Figure3c.png" title="Fig. 3b & 3c:" alt="A filtered version of the force directed layout" caption="A Fruchterman-Rheingold force-directed network layout. A spatial relationship still emerges by virtue of the strong connections within geographic regions, but major cities form the central axis, despite their relative distances. Cities featured in a high proportion of domestic to international routes are pushed to the margins of the network despite their high degree; see, for example, Cologne, Naples, and Valladolid. On the right (3c), filtering the same layout by degree >= 10 reveals the international core of the network." >}}


{{% notation title="Calculating Network Metrics" %}}

It is possible to calculate these network metrics using either Gephi or
relevant packages in the R or Python programming languages. The easiest
web platform tool is John Ladd, "Network Navigator," Aug 30 2019, at
<https://network-navigator.library.cmu.edu/>.

{{% /notation %}}

Both visualizations highlight hubs, from a complex of Northern Italian
cities, to the political capitals of Madrid, Paris and Vienna. Other
hubs are perhaps more surprising to early modernists, as they have not
been as widely studied as centers of transit and communication: Leipzig,
Dresden and Milan. An itinerary was published in each city, while two
authors were postal officials in Milan and Dresden. Even when those
titles are removed from consideration, the cities retain a
higher-than-average degree, meaning numbers of connections to other
nodes.[^49] Our understanding of communication and exchange networks
necessarily derives from the surviving archives. Historians of
information have long emphasized the hub roles of capital cities like
London, Madrid, and Paris. It is worth noting that Milan, Leipzig and
Dresden all saw ample destruction of archives in succeeding centuries,
from the Thirty Years' War to the twentieth century. The itineraries
corpus suggests that on the basis of shared network characteristics, the
role of these cities is worth greater attention by historians of
pan-European communication and exchange.[^50]

In a history of Europe's diplomatic couriers, E. John B. Allen begins a
chapter on routes by stating: "if one thing is plain it is that the
merchant and pilgrim routes were not those used by the post
riders.[^51]" In fact, by refocusing from the abstract infrastructure on
the mental maps employed, published and sold by postal professionals
among other agents, we see pilgrimage and mercantile routes continued to
exercise conceptual power, even in "postal" itineraries. The analysis of
the relative importance of cities within the itinerary corpus requires a
more nuanced approach than the sheer number of their connections. As
humanists, we might describe a city as important not just by the
quantity, but also the quality of its external ties. Social network
analysis (SNA) offers several metrics that are of use here, which
additionally remain constant, regardless of the network's visual
layout.[^52] The "centrality" of a point can be a useful proxy for
quantifying importance to the overall route corpus. Centrality metrics
indicate that merchant and pilgrim routes played a key structuring role
in the worldview referenced, reprinted and employed by postal agents
among other itinerary producers.

{{% notation title="Reading the Metrics" %}}

This method has been primarily employed by Ruth and Sebastian Ahnert in
their consideration of Tudor networks. I picked up this approach from
the Early Modern Digital Agendas and Networking Archives seminars, which
is now well represented in a new volume (available as an open access
Ebook): Ruth Ahnert, Sebastian Ahnert, Catherine Nicole Coleman, Scott
B. Weingart, *The Network Turn: Changing Perspectives in the Humanities*
(Cambridge: 2020).

{{% /notation %}}

Betweenness centrality provides a metric of the likelihood of the
shortest paths within the network to pass through the given point.[^53]
A point with high betweenness centrality is often regarded as a key
broker within a social network, by virtue of its control over network
flow. A point with many connections, or high degree, will tend to have a
higher betweenness centrality, so a scaled measure (dividing the
centrality by degree) can provide a more comparable metric. Without
scaling, the highest-ranking cities remain similar to the above noted
hubs. With scaling, a new set of French cities rank highly, particularly
in Normandy (Caen, Loudon), and the Pays de Loire and Centre-Val de
Loire regions (Amboise, Blois, Orléans), and Nouvelle-Aquitaine
(Bayonne, Bordeaux, Poitiers). These are joined by the Spanish region of
Castille and León (Valladolid).

{{% notation title="Generative Exploration" %}}

At the outset of this project, I knew very little about the Camino de
Santiago, outside of a brief encounter during my time at the Archivo
General de Simancas. The digital findings drove me back to the original
sources, at which point I made the connection. It is always a challenge
to demonstrate how a digital methodology reveals news insight by
comparison to traditional methods. In this and many other cases, the
digital surfaces new research directions, which can be further
reinforced through traditional evidence, such as prose excerpts.

{{% /notation %}}

The relatively high centrality of the Nouvelle-Aquitaine, Loire, and
Castille and León regions can all be associated with the more than
2,000-kilometer-long pilgrimage trail known as the Path of St. James, or
the *Camino de Santiago*. The distant reading of the routes in the
itinerary demonstrates the long-lasting impact of the path on the
overall conceptualization of European trade and travel. Even the
relatively geographically and politically marginal city of Santiago de
Compostela --- home to the sacred shrine of St. James --- ranks
disproportionately highly in scaled betweenness centrality. The route
was an early translation from manuscript to print, and frequently
advertised within the itineraries as a separate addition. The first
route of Codogno's *New Itinerary* was not one from his native Milan,
but rather "the posts from the Most Holy House of Loreto ending in Saint
Giacomo of Galicia." The reprinting of this popular religious journey
well represents the reliance of the *Nuovo itinerario* on generations of
prior itineration.[^54] Most scholarship on the path focuses on the
Middle Ages, yet the itineraries demonstrate that it continued to have
deep cultural --- and religious--- resonance through the seventeenth
century.[^55] Ample military conflict likely further restricted options
for travel between France and Spain across the Pyrenees, making the
route uniquely important to holding together the overall mental map of
Europe. On the other hand, we see the importance of Normandy (Caen,
Loudon, Rouen), with a high betweenness centrality deriving from the
channeling of traffic to and from its northern ports: early signs of a
trend that would strengthen with the meteoric rise of London in the
eighteenth century.

{{% notation title="Selective Mapping" %}}

Representing this data as a map instead of a network or table guides
analysis back in the direction of real journeys, as well as
reintroducing key terrain elements, such as the Alpine and Pyrenees
mountain ranges. The network metrics have been calculated in Gephi,
exported, and then reimported into Tableau for these visualizations. The
plain grey backgrounds function as a minimalist background without
adding anachronistic political divisions. While I experimented with maps
that included more terrain elements, I found these to be more useful for
the research rather than the presentation stage of visualization.

{{% /notation %}}

{{< figure src="/img/Midura-Figure4a.png" title="" alt="Map route of locations by betweenness centrality rank." >}}
{{< figure src="/img/Midura-Figure4b.png" title="Fig. 4a & 4b:" alt="Map of points along the Path of St. James." caption="Map of route locations colored by betweenness centrality rank (darkest gradient being the highest rank) and map of points along the historic Path of St. James. High betweenness centrality indicates the likelihood of connections in the network to pass through a given node, demonstrating that the path of St. James continued to play a uniquely important role connecting Spain and France." >}}


**Fig. 4a & 4b: Map of route locations colored by betweenness centrality
rank (darkest gradient being the highest rank) and map of points along
the historic Path of St. James. High betweenness centrality indicates
the likelihood of connections in the network to pass through a given
node, demonstrating that the path of St. James continued to play a
uniquely important role connecting Spain and France.**

The eigenvector centrality algorithm is similar to those used by major
search engines to order results: it weighs the quality of the
connections not just of the point in question, but also of those to
which it is connected. In a social network, an individual with high
eigenvector centrality might be someone who was friends with "all the
right people."[^56] In this case, eigenvector centrality brings forth
many regions familiar to scholars of the Thirty Years' War as notable
battlegrounds, from the Rhineland-Palatinate, to Bavaria, Lombardy, and
the Piedmont. Yet the highest ranking cities by eigenvector centrality
tended to be cities in smaller regions, many of which were located near
to the Alpine passes: the St. Gallen pass (Schaffhausen); Splügen and
St. Bernard passes (Bergamo, Lindau, Chur); Brenner pass (Villach,
Innsbruck, Graz); and the St. Gotthard and Simplon Passes (Simplon,
Bern, Lucerne). Locations associated with the Simplon Pass rank
especially highly, despite the relative difficulty of the passes, only
made tenable with the construction of the *Teufelsbrücke* ("Devil's
Bridge") over the Schöllenen Gorge in the thirteenth century.[^57]

{{< figure src="/img/Midura-Figure5a.png" title="" alt="Map route of locations by eigenvector centrality rank." >}}
{{< figure src="/img/Midura-Figure5b.png" title="Fig. 5a & 5b:" alt="Map of the historic Roman Way." caption="Map of route locations colored by eigenvector centrality rank (darkest being the highest rank) and map of the historic Roman Way (Romweg) as depicted by Erhard Etzlaub’s Romweg map (Nürnberg: c. 1500). High eigenvector centrality indicates the connectivity of nodes to which a node is itself connected. Transalpine commerce continued to connect the most influential cities by way of a limited number of Alpine passes." >}}


**Fig. 5a & 5b: Map of route locations colored by eigenvector centrality
rank (darkest being the highest rank) and map of the historic Roman Way
(*Romweg*) as depicted by Erhard Etzlaub's *Romweg* map (Nürnberg: c.
1500). High eigenvector centrality indicates the connectivity of nodes
to which a node is itself connected. Transalpine commerce continued to
connect the most influential cities by way of a limited number of Alpine
passes.**

The prominence of these cities demonstrates how the itineraries were
often structured as journeys to and from such natural gathering points:
a traveler might arrive from a number of directions, and depart in a
similarly diverse manner. We see how the itineraries functioned similar
to an index, presupposing both the most common content and structure of
the queries that readers would bring to them. These limited passes ---
which are joined, to a lesser extent, by several notable sea ports ---
were key transit points for travel and exchange. By comparison to
network studies of Europe based on newspaper datelines or correspondence
data, a model based on the itineraries highlights these key brokers,
well-familiar to contemporary travelers and administrators.[^58] At the
same time, the itineraries enacted the centrality of these locations by
organizing the routes around them, raising their profile to sit
alongside more populous or wealthy cities. Cosmopolitan users of the
itineraries were likely familiar with them, in the same way a modern
traveler might know a region primarily by its international airport.

These metrics and the overall network visualization indicate how
structurally dependent the conceived European system was on these
fundamentally limited channels. The importance given in the itineraries
to the mountain passes of Europe reflect the real limitations on the
flow of information and people in a pre-modern age. Scholarship on the
Thirty Years' War often focuses on the courtly theaters and
battlegrounds of central Europe, yet the itineraries remind us of the
fragility of a network dependent on fundamentally limited paths for
communication and mobility.[^59] We can see why warfare in the
Palatinate and the Grisons might have reverberations in the
communication and exchange networks across Europe, but also how such
conflict took place in a key area of the European mental map. Scholars
have addressed how the prolific broadsheets of the Thirty Years War
would have made readers at a distance more familiar with these regions,
yet the itineraries suggest that these regions may not have seemed all
that far to begin with. Readers may have brought some familiarity, and
perhaps even some understanding of the implications that disruption
would bring for pan-European connectivity.[^60]

As in most studies of ephemeral press, the possible scope of readership
remains complex. Codogno's itinerary was circulated among contemporary
administrators of several nationalities, and the postmaster lieutenant
advertised it to a wider public, expressing the view that the Tassis
family of postmasters had established the posts "not just for the
convenience of their princes and lords, but also for the common good
(*commune utilità*) of all businessmen (*negotianti*)." New editions
were published in Venice in 1611 and 1676. The Tassis imperial
postmasters in Venice shared a copy with their cousin, the postmaster
general in Brussels.[^61] A later Venetian administrator lauded Codogno
as "the best author, who had distilled the finest matters of governing
the posts and couriers."[^62]

The appeal of the itineraries to a burgeoning class of semi-official
state agents and long-distance businessmen (*negotianti*) is apparent
and supported by the prefatory materials and limited marginalia.
Giovanni Torriano's *Della Lingua Toscana-Romana, or, An Introduction to
the Italian Tongue* (1657) included a number of dialogues, including
postal negotiations.[^63] One such dialogue contains the exchange
between a British traveler and Italian companion, "I have the giurnal in
my pocket/ What Scottus?/No, the post-book."[^64] The rare snippet
indicates how both figures could be familiar enough with Schottus and
postal itineraries to refer to them in a casual short-hand, while also
carrying one or the other on the road. Governing administrators also
referred to the books in making administrative decisions, as they did in
debating the relative merits of the "old" and "new" roads from Italy
into France.[^65] A 1673 copy of French itinerary *Le Voyage de France*
(1648) contains the signature of "D. Juan Gaspar Zorrilla", linking the
book to the Duke of Osuna, counselor of the Spanish King.[^66] The
printed itineraries were published by, and accessible to, a diverse
audience. Historians of news and communications have also shown how the
mixture of oral, visual, scribal, and print modes could diffuse through
a much wider swath of society.[^67]

{{% notation title="Stepping Back" %}}

The initial results from data analysis took me back to secondary sources
as well as primary sources, as I ascertained whether researchers of
other media (using digital and traditional methods) had seen similar
results.

{{% /notation %}}

In most cases, the paratextual materials of the itineraries called
attention to their inclusion of pilgrimage routes; the structuring
effect of the mountain passes is inferable, if not as explicitly noted.
Yet in a third key respect, analysis of the itinerary routes indicates a
mental map that was somewhat at odds with itself: the placement of
Spain. While geographically far from the heart of Europe, given the
strong connections between Spain, Italy, and Austria --- as well as the
continued prominence of the Path of St. James --- we might reasonably
expect to see a greater network proximity between Spanish cities and
other European centers. Ottavio Codogno dedicated his first itinerary to
the Spanish governor of Milan, and later editions to the Spanish
postmaster general. Even the prominence given to the route of St. James,
often referred to as a patron saint of Spain, may have indicated an
effort to appeal to such Spanish patrons. Yet Spain remains one of the
most well-defined communities within the network model, with few links
to nodes of other national grouping. The contributors to *News Networks
in Early Modern Europe* note a similar distance in networks of early
modern newsletter production, indicating Spanish dependence on
intermediaries, and inferring that a poorly integrated postal network
might be the cause.[^68]

{{% notation title="Internal Contradictions" %}}

Distant reading route tables and close reading paratextual material does
not always provide a harmonious picture. This case was one of important
contradictions, revealing a fundamental tension in the genre.

{{% /notation %}}

The itineraries offer a very different spatial organization than a
traditional hub-periphery model of empire. The majority of authors and
publishers were not themselves Spanish, Burgundian, or Austrian, but
frequently resided in territories occupied or ruled by the Habsburgs,
such as parts of the Holy Roman Empire, or Spanish Lombardy.[^69] As the
overall directionality of the routes indicate, Spain was a distant
destination rather than origin point. By comparison to destinations in
the Netherlands or across the Alps, where geographic distance was
collapsed into direct abstracted links, the journey to and from Spain
was exaggerated, with journeys further characterized as over difficult
terrain, subject to political disruption, and lacking in necessary
postal waystations. Spain's communication and military channels were
frequently threatened by French incursion into the Pyrenees passes and
the Spanish Road.[^70] In fact, Codogno's *Nuovo itinerario* (1608)
featured two routes between Milan and Madrid, one qualified as "the
shortest, when the French permit passage."[^71] Travelers and couriers
were routinely captured and subject to harassment by local and military
officials. Both Figures 3 & 4 indicate an overall absence of locations
in the southwest of France, the site of much disruption in the course of
the French Wars of Religion. The distance of Spain, by contrast to
paratextual material that seeks the affiliation of client to patron,
indicates the influence of experiential knowledge on the communicated
mental map.

In other cases, itineraries were produced in territories that were
openly hostile to Habsburg rule: see, for example, James Wadsworth's
foreword to his English translation, which disavowed the many "Catholic
superstitions" inherited from the original Italian text (likely
referring to location annotations referring to reliquaries), or the
Venetian editions of Codogno's itinerary, which removed its original
dedications.[^72] While the convergences of the itinerary corpus can
tell us a great deal about shared imaginings, we should not lose sight
of the different, and sometimes conflicting ideologies and identities
guiding their production. Despite documenting infrastructure
increasingly put into place by the Habsburg imperial project, such as
the Thurn und Taxis posts, the itineraries were most frequently produced
far from the royal courts. Ephemeral print both echoed and amplified an
imagined community.[^73] The distancing of Spain speaks to contemporary
difficulties of reconciling Spain's newly dominant role in Europe and
the world. The ancient routes of pilgrimage and trade connecting cities
across the Alps and Pyrenees continued to be held in common, but the
combined forces of experiential knowledge and geopolitical reckoning
pushed Spain to the margins of the international network. Whether the
distancing of Spain better reflected the real experience of travel, or
the conflicted views of itinerary creators, the network model allows us
to visualize and explore the push-pull forces at work in shaping
conceived space.

{{% notation title="Tailoring the Visual" %}}

Original iterations of this article juxtaposed spatial/non-spatial,
static/dynamic models much more strongly, making the case for a
non-spatial dynamic model. Overall, this version now relies on a
spectrum of interpretations and visualizations, matching the approach to
the question being asked in each section. No one visualization method is
wrong, but can be unsuitable to answer a given research question.

{{% /notation %}}

**Network Dynamism**

Based on the static networks alone, one might wrongly conclude that
little changed in patterns of European travel and exchange from the
fifteenth century through the eighteenth. In fact, a dynamic network
model reveals key structural shifts: while inherited mercantile and
pilgrimage routes continued to be republished into the seventeenth
century, they played a diminishing structural role in the overall
conceptual network.

{{% notation title="Animation" %}}

The depiction of dynamic networks remains a challenging problem based on
the tendency of animated visualization to overwhelm, rather than inform.
Working with the mentioned R packages allowed for moving between static
and dynamic visualizations. See Alex Brey, \"Temporal Network Analysis
with R,\" The Programming Historian 7 (2018), at
<https://programminghistorian.org/en/lessons/temporal-network-analysis-with-r>

{{% /notation %}}

In order to consider the corpus as an evolving body, I introduced a
temporal element in the form of the published "lives" of routes and
edges. Like the new postal infrastructure of the sixteenth century, the
published routes inherited and overlaid centuries of commerce,
communication, and pilgrimage --- this is made particularly clear by the
most frequent relationships that appear across the routes in the corpus:
Rome to Naples, Milan to Brescia, Rome to Venice, and Lyon to Grenoble.
Routes, once published, entered a wider public consciousness as an
abstraction of physical space, but also a concretion of the idea of a
connected Europe. The routes hierarchized cities based on perceived
reader demand: just as a search engine might suggest a frequently
traveled route, the itinerary creators predicted where and in what
direction their readers would travel.[^74] We can therefore think of
these routes as having lifetimes as ideas, as defined by their first and
last published appearances. The parallel is not exact, particularly as
the ideas of the routes certainly predate their appearance in print, and
certainly continue to be referenced years after their final publication,
if in other forms.[^75] Yet the period of active publication represents
that of the greatest impact of a given route, as each instance of reuse
suggests a continued evaluation of applicability by itinerary creators.
The "death" of a route is accomplished by either its absence from future
editions, or reincarnation in the form of different cities and
directionalities. The rise and fall of certain cities, the growth and
decay of routes, and the varying pace of change between infrastructural
development and its documentation in popular reference works has much to
tell us about European space. By keeping these methods at the forefront
of our approach, it is possible to consider the routes together as a
dynamic corpus from which itinerary creators sourced their material, and
added or removed elements as they deemed best. The resulting model
offers a dynamic view of the overall project of itinerating Europe that
can be read atop its physical geography, but is ultimately an abstracted
network of only semi-spatial relationships between cities.[^76]

The analysis of the route data in combination with the close reading of
the itineraries indicates four clear periods: the first published
itinerary books appeared from 1545-1565, with examples like Villuga's
*Repertorio* (1545) and Gail's *Raißbuechlin* (1563). By 1565, we see
the advent of the postal itinerary genre, particular in Northern Italy.
Works like Dal'Herba and Stella's *Itinerario* (1563) combined
newly-developed postal routes with historical routes of pilgrimage and
commerce. It is likely that the plague of 1575/1576 and renewed military
conflict across Europe contributed to the relative lull in publication
between 1575-1600. 1600-1630 saw unprecedented itinerary production with
encyclopedic scope, from Mayenne's *Sommaire* (1604) to Codogno's *Nuovo
itinerario* (1608) and *Compendio delle poste* (1623). 1635-1680 saw few
new titles, but many republications of existing works. Once again, we
might point to plague (1630) and military conflict as a likely cause for
a lull. In fact, it was not until the final period of 1680-1740 that new
titles appeared, including Giuseppe Miselli's *Burattino veridico*
(1682) and Giovan Vidari's *Viaggio in pratica* (1718).[^77]

{{% notation title="Constructing the Model" %}}

While these assumptions and filters will rightfully invite questions and
even pushback, they make explicit several assumptions that are often
implicit, such as the continued relevance of republished material.
Similarly, while the analysis does exclude information, it includes a
great deal more information than would be possible in a traditional
selection of case-studies

{{% /notation %}}

The networkDynamic package in R aids in the creation of a dynamic
network model, and the extraction of many static networks to represent
time-slices. We can thereby refine this periodization, offering further
evidence for when important shifts in the genre took place. New routes
often repeated the same edges, meaning individual connections between
cities: the most significant changes to routes broke or connected cities
in different ways, creating or removing the edges of the network. By
graphing incidents of edge formation and edge dissolution, we can
identify overall trends, and offer new insight for the overall
periodization of transit and exchange in this period, as conceived by
the itinerary creators and propagated by their books. Two significant
filters are in effect: first, only routes that appear across multiple
authors are under consideration, second, locations have been filtered
for a minimum degree of two. These filters have been applied to balance
the impact of highly anomalous itineraries and routes, in keeping with
the goal of illustrating the logic common to many authors, as well as
for simple legibility of visualization.

{{% notation title=Time-Slices" %}}

The choice of timeslices is always a matter of balancing subjective and
objective divisions. In this case, the unit of each timeslice (35 years)
is uniform, but the dates are chosen with an eye to contemporary
political events and traditional historiographical periodization.

{{% /notation %}}

{{< figure src="/img/Midura-Table1.png" title="Table 1:" alt="A table of network properties on given timeslices." caption="A table representing the network properties at any given timeslice. The density refers to the ratio of connections present in a network to total possible connections (i.e. all nodes being connected to all others). Note that the overall trend is towards increasing density, although the mean degree peaks in the middle of the seventeenth century. The standardization of routes reduced the size and diversity of the route corpus." >}}

**Table 1: A table representing the network properties at any given
timeslice. The density refers to the ratio of connections present in a
network to total possible connections (i.e. all nodes being connected to
all others). Note that the overall trend is towards increasing density,
although the mean degree peaks in the middle of the seventeenth century.
The standardization of routes reduced the size and diversity of the
route corpus.**

A network extract of active routes in 1565 demonstrates the limited
international connections in a largely segmented corpus. Many
communities have a tree-like appearance, illustrating how the
itineraries were structured as regional journeys branching from major
urban centers. The core of the network featured capital cities (Madrid,
Rome, and Paris), however it primarily consisted of commercial and
demographic powerhouses: Lyon played an equal role to Paris, Milan an
equal role to Rome.[^78] Augsburg, Frankfurt and Nuremberg appear
particularly prominently as the channels to and from the Holy Roman
Empire, due to both their commercial significance and strategic position
for transalpine commerce. Polish commercial centers like Wrocław and
Gdansk were notably incorporated, while the Hanseatic cities that had
dominated trade in previous centuries were largely absent. Venice
remained within a largely Italian subnetwork, reflecting the
intra-European and land-based focus of the early itinerary corpus, which
only sporadically included the city as a way-point on journeys further
East. The core of the 1565 network reflected the geographic heart of
Europe, but also indicated that commercial connections were of primary
interest to the early itinerary creators.

The network model allows us to visually and quantitatively appreciate
the scale of shifts between the earliest itineraries (beginning from
1545) and the 1560s advent of the postal itinerary subgenre. The
earliest published itineraries had structured their routes with a
domestic, short-distance traveler in mind. The postal itineraries looked
to a more international, longer-distance traveler. The median distance
of routes published prior to 1560 was only 113 km, while the median of
those added from 1560-1580 was 243 km. Only 7.7% of routes published
prior to 1560 were international, while more than a third of those added
from 1560-1580 were.[^79] During the period of most encyclopedic
publication (1600-1625), the median distances and rate of international
to domestic routes remained constant, but the variety of routes
increased instead, particularly along the southwest-northeast axis all
the way from Rome to London. Itinerary creators drew heavily upon the
existing literature, but also pushed it further in a few noteworthy
routes, following new postal infrastructure across the Alps and the
English Channel, but also Russia, southern Italy, and the New World.

{{% notation title="Small Multiples" %}}

"Small multiples" allows for the representation of dynamism in a static
form. I have kept the labeled cities and national group colorings
consistent across visualizations in the article to further invite
comparison and contrast across the article. While I am only able to
address a subset of cities in the article text, an interested reader
will be able to follow cities such as Constantinople or Naples across
the visualizations.

{{% /notation %}}

{{< figure src="/img/Midura-Figure6a.png" title="" alt="Network extract from 1585." >}}
{{< figure src="/img/Midura-Figure6b.png" title="" alt="Network extract from 1600" >}}
{{< figure src="/img/Midura-Figure6c.png" title="Figures 6a, b, c:" alt="Network extract from 1635" caption="Network extracts dating from 1585, 1600 & 1635. The earliest route networks relied on a core of Madrid, Genoa, Milan and Lyon, reflecting the early influence of the postal itinerary subgenre. By 1600, the route corpus had become much more interwoven, with the structuring effect of the Spanish road becoming apparent. New locations such as London and Constantinople rNeeflect the expanding scope of the itinerary genre By 1635, the connections representing the path of St. James appear as a separate chain beneath the dense core, as indicated within the blue box." >}}

By 1600, the core of the network had become more diverse, with
international connections weaving together European space. Even prior to
Codogno's *Nuovo itinerario* (1608) --- which was avowedly
propagandistic in favor of his Habsburg, and Thurn und Taxis patrons ---
we see the structuring effect of the new infrastructure on the
network.[^80] Like the path of Saint James and the "Roman Way," the
Spanish road is best understood as a number of routes utilized by
Spanish administrators to move letters, goods and men, and between Italy
and the Netherlands.[^81] The Dutch Revolts (1568-1648) and
Anglo-Spanish War (1585-1604) drove the improvement of postal routes.
The number of connections to Antwerp and Brussels increased until 1600,
while Strasburg rises to new prominence.[^82] Sites along the strictly
defined Spanish Road by Geoffrey Parker - Genoa, Mont Cenis, Turin,
Lorraine and Luxembourg- show only modest gains if they appeared at all,
reinforcing that contemporaries chose between varied routes and often
relied instead on the St. Gotthard, Simplon and St. Bernard passes.[^83]
Finally, nested within the largely French subnetwork, we find an early
outlier: London, connected only by way of Paris, Calais, and Antwerp.
London under Elizabeth I (r. 1558-1603) had entered on to the world
stage as a center of diplomatic intrigue and international commerce. The
itineraries from this point forward now grouped it among the major
destinations of European traffic, suggesting a new expansion of Europe's
conceptual boundaries.

By 1635, the network had only slightly altered, with Genoa increasingly
playing a core role, and the network of eastern destinations reachable
from Prague developing in diversity and complexity.[^84] Once again, we
see a correspondence with both the Habsburg imperial project and the
work of their Thurn und Taxis postmasters, as the infrastructure
established during Emperor Rudolf's residence in Prague (1583-1612)
affected the itinerary route corpus. Prague, of course, took on entirely
new significance following the Defenestration of Prague in 1618, and the
beginning of the Thirty Years' War (1618-1648). Like London, the city
gravitated towards the center of the conceived European space. On the
whole, the network's central axis is a tightly connected,
multi-directional series of links between the Habsburg capitals of
Madrid, Brussels, Prague and Vienna, all linked through Italy. By
comparison, the network model conveys the fragility of connections to
and from France and Spain. The Path of St. James persists, but in the
form of an almost entirely separate axis (shown within the box below the
major component in Fig. 6c). A once key structure for the itineraries
gradually became vestigial, with new infrastructures providing the
primary organizing logics. The separation of the axis indicates how the
connections --- once building blocks for other routes as well as the
path --- remain as a genre trope rather than fundamental component.

{{% notation title="New Insight" %}}

This was a result that I had not predicted upon beginning the project.
While the digital method can occasionally be hidden by the following
return to close reading, it is worth stating here that the initial
surprise of the results took me down a new road of inquiry, particularly
reconsidering the role of cartography.

{{% /notation %}}

The most dramatic shift in the network dates to the period of greatest
edge dissolution, around 1680. The crowded transnational core, and
particularly the transalpine connections, were replaced with a more
linear network in appearance. The overall density of the network
increased, but the number of nodes was less than a third of the number
at its peak.[^85] This was not due to a lack of itinerary publication:
new itineraries published after 1680 contributed nearly 1,000 entries to
the database. New titles included Miselli's *Burattino veridico* (1684),
new editions of Schottus' *Itinerarii* (1700), and Benjamin Schiller's
*Die vornehmsten Europäischen Reisen* (1703). It is worth reiterating
that the model as established is limited to routes published by multiple
authors, meaning that this shift can be interpreted in two ways: first,
that authors published fewer routes in common with the past, and second,
that authors published fewer routes in common with their contemporaries.
In either case, we see a clear departure from prior practice.

{{< figure src="/img/Midura-Figure6d.png" title="" alt="Network extract from 1670" >}}
{{< figure src="/img/Midura-Figure6e.png" title="Figures 6d and 6e:" alt="Network extract from 1680" caption="The radical shift in structure illustrates the end or re-organization of several long-running titles. It demonstrates how new titles standardized the route corpus, likely due in part to the influence of new infrastructure and ideology." >}}

The dynamic network demonstrates that after 1680, itinerary creators
structured European space in fundamentally different ways than they had
prior. The cities included, the types of connections between them, and
the overall structure of the conceived European systems of
communication, travel, and exchange were altered. Several titles that
had been republished for more than a hundred years fell out of a favor,
replaced by relative newcomers. The network model illustrates how these
new itineraries, while standing on the shoulders of their predecessors,
reorganized much of the geographic narrative. It would be difficult, if
not impossible, to appreciate the scope of this shift without the
network model- particularly given that several editions were published
under the same titles as they had been for the past century, obscuring
substantial alterations in content.

{{< figure src="/img/Midura-Figure7a.png" title="" alt="Postal itinerary network graph" >}}
{{< figure src="/img/Midura-Figure7b.png" title="Fig. 7a & 7b:" alt="Postal itinerary network graph" caption="The two postal itineraries produced by Northern Italian postal officials encapsulate the difference in organization logic developed over time. Whereas Codogno’s Compendio delle poste (1623) drew direct connections between major cities, Vidari’s Viaggio in prattica (1720) followed along long, regularized roads. Note the new prominence of cities such as Frankfurt, London, and Leipzig." >}}

A comparison of the structure of Codogno's *Nuovo itinerario* (1608)
with Giovanni Maria Vidari's *Viaggio in prattica* (1720) demonstrates
the structural shift on a smaller scale. Like Codogno, Vidari was a
northern Italian post official, writing from Venice in place of
Codogno's Milan. Codogno's itinerary is representative of much of
earlier seventeenth-century itinerary production: journeys from and
between a central transnational core wielding notable political and
commercial power, with more regional routes radiating outwards from
respective hubs. The Habsburg capitals of Naples, Brussels, Madrid and
Prague predominate. The Vidari network is instead structured by chains
of connected locations, derived from long headings such as "the road and
posts from Paris to Madrid, passing through Orleans, Blois, Poitiers,
Bordeaux, Bayonne, San Gio. De Luz, San Sebastian and Burgos." Codogno's
*Compendio* (1623), which was encyclopedic in scope compared to its
contemporaries, mapped 436 routes connecting 242 locations. Headings in
Vidari's *Viaggio* composed fewer routes (286), but drew links between
more than twice as many locations (428).

How might we explain these differences? First, we might note the visible
dissassembly of the Habsburg axis. A number of state posts had risen to
challenge the Thurn und Taxis posts within the Holy Roman Empire, most
notably the Swedish post during the war based in Frankfurt (1632-1635),
followed by the Kurbrandenburgisch-Preussische Post based in Berlin
(1649), and Kursächsische Post based in Dresden and Leipzig (1651).[^86]
As indicated earlier, both Dresden and Leipzig demonstrated a
higher-than-average degree across time, predating the foundation of
these independent systems--- see, for example, the itineraries produced
by Dresden postal official Daniel Witzenburger in the 1570's, and the
later German edition of Giuseppe Miselli's *Il Buratinno veridico* by
Leipzig publisher Christian Coelii.[^87] Reading across the itineraries
demonstrates how early that prominence began, providing important
context to the eventual independence of these infrastructures.

Second, we can note the decreasing diversity of routes. By the late
seventeenth century, the itinerary network showed the impact of the
rising modern state. In 1718, Charles VI had ordered the reincorporation
of all Thurn und Taxis posts into a single body, and Empress Maria
Theresa (r.1745-1765) followed suit, ordering visitations throughout the
Austrian territories and forcibly seizing control in the Tyrol.[^88]
Seizures preceded the institution of new controls on freedom of
movement, from customs to passports. States also channeled resources
towards road building, making a few options much more appealing than
others. The effect on the itinerary network was to thin and lengthen it,
pruning its many options into a select few. Visually the networks closer
resembles the grand roads of the eighteenth century, rather than their
original dense network of routes.[^89]

The itinerary network did not reflect the pace of real-world changes,
but rather their slow percolation into reference materials. The Peace of
the Pyrenees in 1659 settled long-standing French and Spanish conflict
upon that frontier. 1660 notably saw an international postal conference
held in Paris, with new accords between the French and Imperial
postmasters (with routing reworked in 1668 as a part of the Aachen peace
treaty). Continental transit to and from England was surely affected by
the Anglo-Dutch and Franco-Dutch Wars of the 1670s, with all trade
between France and England briefly banned in 1678. These changes took
time to affect the historically conceived European network, but by the
1680s, their effects are apparent. A new edition of Codogno's
*Itinerario* (1676) continued to feature the old route between Paris and
London by way of Dieppe, and several routes in the Netherlands unwise
for a traveler or courier in that decade.[^90] By 1682, Giuseppe
Miselli's *Il Burratino veridico* would focus instead on routes that
passed through the increasingly popular Calais.[^91] Leipzig was
conspicuously absent from Codogno's itineraries, while it featured quite
prominently in Vidari's *Viaggio* (1720) and others.[^92]

{{% notation title="Network Layouts" %}}

These graphs are produced in R, see Brey, \"Temporal Network Analysis
with R." While visual network layouts always have a random element, the
graphs represent the underlying quantitative changes.

{{% /notation %}}

{{< figure src="/img/Midura-Figure8a.png" title="" alt="Graph of edge formation over time" >}}
{{< figure src="/img/Midura-Figure8b.png" title="Fig. 8a & 8b:" alt="Graph of edge dissolution over time" caption="Graphs of edge formation and dissolution in the networks over time. While the 1560s and 1600s saw the addition of many new relations between cities, the 1680s saw the disappearance of many of the same from the route corpus." >}}

In this way, structural shifts both reflected and impacted the fate of
individual cities. By the beginning of the eighteenth century, few
international connections are present in the itineraries, outside of a
series of routes linking Milan, Prague and Frankfurt. While located
along the same general courses as Augsburg, Nuremberg and Regensburg,
Frankfurt had notably unseated these cities in the hierarchy created by
the corpus of routes.[^93] This is somewhat anomalous given the
historical and bibliographical context: unlike Dresden, Leipzig, or
Milan, Frankfurt was not a site of itinerary production within the
database. In fact, Frankfurt's rise to prominence in the itineraries had
more to do with the longstanding pattern of increasing traffic along the
south-east, north-west axis. Frankfurt also served a dual purpose in
connecting Bavarian and Northern Italian cities with France, as routes
had been deliberately shifted to avoid dependence on Cologne from the
middle of the seventeenth century.[^94] By 1702, the Thurn und Taxis
family branch of Brussels had also notably resettled in Frankfurt.

With the rise of cities like Frankfurt, came the displacement of other
historical hubs: Milan, Augsburg, and Lyon had long been at the core of
the European network. These cities had been some of the most populous
and wealthy in the fifteenth and sixteenth centuries. Agreements between
the regional messengers of the cities and the Tassis posts had been some
of the earliest ordinary routes in Europe. Yet we see that by the
eighteenth century, their role had been significantly diminished. As
with all *long durée* shifts, it is difficult to pinpoint any single
factor, however one likely answer seems the rise of travel by sea.
Milan, Augsburg, and Lyon remained landlocked, while cities like
Marseille, Livorno, and Genoa provided crucial links to a developing
global network of trade and travel.

## Conclusion 

In 1632, Nicolas Sanson published *Carte Geographique des Postes qui
traversent la France* with royal privilege, the first known printed
postal map. The map marked the cartographic entree of the young royal
geographer, made a councilor of the state the same year that the post
was officially opened to private users in France (1627). In many extant
versions, national borders have been highlighted as well as the postal
lines, represented by a line dotted with the individual postal stops and
occasionally numbers denoting the number of posts. The French posts are
shown as far as London in England (via Calais), Brussels to the
northeast, and St. Jean de Luz to the southwest, the Camino de Santiago
stopped abruptly at the French-Spanish border. The permanence of that
line is betrayed in a copy held by Princeton library, where the former
border at Salses has been roughly expunged and redrawn to the south of
Perpignan.[^95]

{{< figure src="/img/Midura-Figure9.png" title="Fig. 9" alt="Carte Geographique" caption="Nicolas Sanson’s Carte Geographique. The map charted postal routes, but only those within France’s borders." >}}

**Fig. 9: Nicolas Sanson's *Carte Geographique*. The map charted postal
routes, but only those within France's borders.**

The advent of the postal map did not mark the end of the itinerary, but
did begin a new chapter in geographic knowledge. In fact, the map
affected a very different image and purpose than the itineraries:
compare the densely connected international network circa 1600 (Figure
6b) to the map above. While both included many of the same routes,
Sanson's routes were sharply circumvented by national borders. The field
of vision was limited to France, with Paris, Limoges, and Lyon forming a
central triad. Mayenne's *Sommaire* (1604), republished in 1629, had
accorded a much more prominent role to Metz and Nancy, which channeled
traffic from Paris further east. In Sanson's depiction, Metz was the end
of the line, while Nancy was reduced to one of several stops en route to
Basel. Germany, Switzerland, Italy, and Spain consist of sparse cities
distributed along riverways, but largely empty space, contrasted to
France's finely ordered infrastructure.

Sanson's map was an early example, with the postal map coming into vogue
from the 1690s into the eighteenth century. Many scholars have made the
case for the mutual development of cartography and the modern
nation-state's territorializing and surveilling agenda.[^96]
Cartographers of the seventeenth century and beyond often received
patronage from state or religious institutions, and produced maps for
the explicit purpose of furthering and showcasing infrastructure. While
originally produced for the elite, many maps made their way to a wider
audience, even incorporated into itineraries. Later editions of Peter
Ambrosius Lohmann's *Die vornehmsten Europeaischen Reisen* (1703)
included a detailed fold-out map (titled *Besondere Post und Reise Carte
der Wege durch Teutschland*) with heraldry indicating regional
sovereignties and Frankfurt dominating the network. Like their
audiences, itinerary creators increasingly applied maps to organizing
spatial relations. Cologne printer Lambercum Andree even used the maps
as a method of abbreviating his routes in his *Wegweiser* (1597),
referring readers to the illustrations instead of listing all cities. An
early example, *Wegweiser* has an anomalously large number of routes
(464 routes) and low proportion of routes in common with other authors
(38%, or 177 routes). Paratextual additions also evolved, from early
inserts of pilgrimage paths and merchant's tools for the conversion of
currencies and mileage, to the state-instituted timetables and tariffs
of travel.

While we have long recognized that maps applied an ideology to space,
itineraries provide us with an important point of comparison and
contrast. The itinerary as a text technology had been in circulation
since the Roman Empire, and the prevalence of the genre across the early
modern period demands that we seek to model early modern space in a way
that better mirrors the conceptualization of its active agents. The
combination of network models and spatial attributes to focus on
conceptual, rather than geographical, relations better preserve the
elements of hierarchy, directionality, and centrality conveyed by the
original itinerary format. The collection of the itinerary routes into a
single, dynamic corpus reflects the collaborative, transnational
publication process, in which itinerary creators incorporated a variety
of texts, intervening only as reader demand and changing infrastructure
required.

Reading across the routes corpus reveals the evolving structuring logics
of itinerating Europe. Key points of convergence include the early
importance of the Camino de Santiago and transalpine commerce. The
postal itinerary subgenre introduced a greater focus on Habsburg- and
Thurn-und-Taxis-provided postal infrastructure, but the corpus as a
whole preserved the tensions of divergent political and religious
allegiance. The relative separation of Spain suggests an interesting
push-pull relationship between that state and the itinerary creators,
who were often located in occupied or hostile territories. The enfolding
of London and Prague, on the other hand, suggests a similar
incorporation into the overall conception of Europe. Prior to 1620, the
itineraries documented the fundamental internationalism of the European
network. After 1680, the itineraries demonstrate the growth of ports and
sea travel, new postal subnetworks, and the standardization brought by
state regulation and cartographic practice.

The route corpus allows us to follow the lives of individual cities as a
part of a wider, decentralized exchange network; from the rise of
London, Frankfurt, and Genoa to the persistent importance of Dresden,
Leipzig, Milan and Lyon. Many of these cities have not been the focus of
historians of information and communication, while a much-analyzed news
hub like Venice plays a relatively minor role in the itinerary network.
The itineraries were international, but largely intra-European and
land-based. They illustrate an alternative communication and travel
network that has been difficult for historians to access in the same
manner as personal correspondence networks, or networks of trade by
sea.[^97]

The charting of space in terms of posts made a deep linguistic
impression across Europe, as nearly every culture developed the term
into a synonym for travel -- in English, "to go by post", "to post", and
travel "post-haste." The project of itinerating Europe remains
collaborative and ongoing, and no doubt influenced by our current moment
of determining the geographic bounds of European identity. The
itineraries also speak to the contemporary challenges of organizing and
operationalizing vast amounts of information, occasionally from far-off
places, and liable to become inaccurate or even danger over even short
periods of time. Just as the individual user of technologies today seeks
to place themselves with reference to a wider world, so too did the
itineraries guide and structure an evolving vision of Europe's imagined
community.

[^1]: This work has been supported by the Stanford Center for Spatial
    and Textual Analysis, The UPS-Endowment funded Stanford Early Modern
    Mobility Group, the Folger Institute as hosts of the NEH-funded
    Early Modern Digital Agendas group, Oxford and Cambridge University
    as hosts of the AHRC-funded Networking Archives colloquium.
    Additional work on the database and coding support was provided by
    Maeva Fincker, Patrick Mutchler, and research assistants Elliot
    Miller and Evan Kim. With thanks to Quinn Dombrowski, and Cameron
    Blevins.

[^2]: Ottavio Codogno, Nuovo itinerario delle poste per tutto il mondo
    (Milano: Girolamo Bordone, 1608).

[^3]: Wolfgang Behringer, Im Zeichen des Merkur: Reichspost und
    Kommunikationsrevolution in der Frühen Neuzeit (Gottingen: 2003);
    Bruno Caizzi, Dalla posta dei re alla posta di tutti: territorio e
    comunicazioni in Italia dal XVI secolo all'Unità (Milano: 1993).

[^4]: Clemente Fedele, Marco Gerosa, and Armando Serra, ed.s, Europa
    Postale: L'Opera di Ottavio Codogno luogotenente dei Tasso nella
    Milano settecentesca (Camerata Cornello: Museo dei Tasso e della
    Storia Postale, 2014). The included map was produced in
    collaboration with the Historical Cartography Lab of Calabria
    University. A similar map of Codogno's two publications with the
    same drawback appears in Nikolaus Schobesberger, Paul Arblaster,
    Mario Infelise, André Belo, Noah Moxham, Carmen Espejo and Joad
    Raymond, "European Postal Networks" in Joad Raymond and Noah Moxham,
    ed.s, News Networks in Early Modern Europe (Leiden: 2016), 60.

[^5]: Shawn Graham, "Networks, Agent-Based Models and the Antonine
    Itineraries: Implications for Roman Archaeology," Journal of
    Mediterranean Archaeology 19 1 (2006): 45-64. Lewis & Short define
    *itinerarium* as either "an account of journey, an itinerary" or "a
    signal for marching." Charlton T. Lewis, Charles Short, A Latin
    Dictionary (Oxford: 1879). Accessed through Perseus Digital Library,
    www.perseus.tufts.edu/hopper/.

[^6]: On medieval itineraries and other miscellanies, see David
    Connolly, "Imagined Pilgrimage in the Itinerary Maps of Matthew
    Paris," The Art Bulletin 81 4 (Dec. 1999): 598-622 ; John S. Lee,
    "The Functions and Fortunes of English Small Towns at the Close of
    the Middle Ages: Evidence from John Leland's "Itinerary," Urban
    History 37 1, (May 2010): 3-25. For an example of a New World
    itinerary see Jan Huygen's Itinerario, voyage of te schipvaert naer
    Oost ofte Portugaels Indien (Antwerp: 1596).

[^7]: I borrow this term from the work of the Stanford Text Technologies
    group. See Elaine Treharne, Claude Willan, ed.s, Text Technologies:
    A History (Stanford: 2019).

    On knowledge projects, see particularly the history of early modern
    science and technology: Marcus Popplow. \"Formalization and
    Interaction: Toward a Comprehensive History of Technology-Related
    Knowledge in Early Modern Europe.\" Isis 106 4 (2015): 848-56.

[^8]: See Sir Herbert George Fordham's works on French itinerary books,
    H. Wolpert on German itineraries, and Armando Serra on Italian
    postal itineraries: Sir Herbert George Fordham, Les routes de France
    ... suivi d'un catalogue des Itinéraires et Guide-Routiers,
    1552-1850 (Paris: 1929) & "The Earliest French Itineraries, 1552 and
    1591: Charles Estienne and Theodore de Mayenne-Turquet" The Library
    (1921): 193-223; Studies in Carto-Bibliography: British and French
    and in the Bibliography of Itineraries and Road-Books (Oxford:
    1914); H. Wolpert, *Schrifttum über das deutsche Postwesen, Erster
    Teil. Vom Anfang des 16. Jahrhunderts bis zum Ende des Römischen
    Reiches Deutscher Nation* (Munich: 1937); Armando Serra, "'Monopolio
    Naturale' di autori postali nella produzione di guide Italiane
    d'Europa," Archivio per la storia postale 14-15 (2003): 19-80;
    "Infrastrutture itinerarie Spagna-Italia tra i secoli XVI-XVIII,"
    Actas del II Congreso Internacional de Camíneria Hispánica, Madrid,
    Alcalá y Guadalajara (July 1994): 177-179; Wolfgang Behringer, "Mit
    der Karte auf Grand Tour. Infrastrukturbildung und Mental Mapping in
    der Frühen Neuzeit," in Christof Dipper, Ute Schneider, Wolfgang
    Behringer, ed.s, Kartenwelten: Der Raum un seine Repräsentatione in
    der Neuzeit (Darmstadt: 2006): 77-93; Wolfgang Behringer, Im Zeichen
    des Merkur: Reichspot und Kommunikationsrevolution in der Frühen
    Neuzeit (Gottingen: 2003).

[^9]: While an accurate portrait on an individual basis, the overall
    historiographical emphasis has been on the exceptional figures
    within the Republic of Letters. Carol Pal, "The Early Modern
    Information Factory: How Samuel Hartlib Turned Correspondence into
    Knowledge," in Paula Findlen, ed., Empires of Knowledge: Scientific
    Networks in the Early Modern World (London; New York: 2018):
    126-158; Hannah Marcus, Paula Findlen, "The Breakdown of Galileo's
    Roman Network: Crisis and Community, ca. 1633." Social Studies of
    Science 47 3 (June 2017): 326--352; Peter Miller, Peiresc's
    Mediterranean World (Cambridge, Mass: 2015); Paula Findlen, ed.,
    Athanasius Kircher: The Last Man Who Knew Everything, (New York:
    2004); The drive to read across a wider corpus of early modern
    correspondence and correspondence has produced a number of major
    digital projects, notably including the Stanford Mapping the
    Republic of Letters Project, at
    <http://republicofletters.stanford.edu/>, and the Oxford Cultures of
    Knowledge Early Modern Letters Online Project, at
    http://www.culturesofknowledge.org.

[^10]: The chronology of the "opening" of the state posts to public use
    remains complex. The 1551 edict of Charles V provided the first
    official recognition of licit use of the Tassis/Habsburg posts by
    private clientele; however postmasters had long carried mail for
    wealthy merchants like the Welsers and Fuggers. See the edict of 4
    November 1551 in Martin Dallmeier, Quellen zur Geschichte des
    Europäischen Postwesens 1501-1806 (Kallmünz: 1977), 16-17.

[^11]: These cities notably differ from a traditional emphasis on cities
    such as London, Venice and Paris as centers of news production and
    circulation. Robert Muchembled and E. William Monter, Cultural
    Exchange in Early Modern Europe (Cambridge: 2006); Joad Raymond and
    Noah Moxham, ed.s, News Networks in Early Modern Europe (Leiden:
    2016).

[^12]: See Immanuel Wallerstein, World-Systems Analysis: Theory and
    Methodology (Ann Arbor: 1993).

[^13]: This intense connectivity and the complications of an
    overwhelming, imperfect information environment has been noted by
    Geoffrey Parker in The Grand Strategy of Phillip II (New Haven;
    London: 1998) & Europe in Crisis: 1598-1648 (Oxford: 2001.

[^14]: Graham, "Networks": 47.

[^15]: This can be effectively contrasted to the decentralized "bird's
    eye" view inherited from Ptolemaic mapping.

[^16]: On the collaborative process of early modern print publishing in
    general, see Robert Darnton "What is the History of Books?" in The
    Case for Books: Past, Present, and Future (New York: 2010) and
    Adrian Johns, The Nature of the Book: Print and Knowledge in the
    Making (Chicago: 2000).

[^17]: Rachel Midura, "The Open Mailbag," "Masters of the Post: Northern
    Italy and European Communications Networks, 1530-1730," Ph.D.
    Dissertation, Stanford University, Stanford, 2020, 292-343.

[^18]: The examples are numerous and include the following: The
    Archaeology of Reading Project, by the Sheridan Libraries-John
    Hopkins University, the Centre for Editing Lives and Letters at the
    University College of London, Princeton University Library and the
    Andrew W. Mellon Foundation, at
    [https://archaeologyofreading.org/](https://archaeologyofreading.org/);
    Andrew Pettegree, et al., The Universal Short Title Catalogue, The
    University of St. Andrews at
    [https://www.ustc.ac.uk/](https://www.ustc.ac.uk/); The
    Bibliotheque Bleue de Troyes by the Project for American and French
    Research on the Treasury of the French Language (ARTFL) at the
    University of Chicago and Collaborative Initiative for French and
    North American Libraries (CIFNAL) at
    [<https://artfl-project-uchicago-edu.stanford.idm.oclc.org/bibliotheque-bleue>.]

[^19]: Jim Tice, Erik Steiner, et al., The Nolli Map Website, University
    of Oregon, 2005-2019, at
    [<http://nolli.uoregon.edu/default.asp>.] Janelle Jenstad, et
    al., The University of Victoria, The Map of Early Modern London
    (MoEML) at [<https://mapoflondon.uvic.ca/>.] See also Benedikt
    Budig, Extracting Spatial Information from Historical Maps:
    Algorithms and Interaction (Wurzburg: 2018).

[^20]: Walter Scheidel and Elijah Meeks, "ORBIS: the Stanford Geospatial
    Network Model of the Roman World" Stanford University, 2012-2019, at
    [<http://orbis.stanford.edu/>.]

[^21]: On the professionalization of agents, see Douglas Biow, Doctors,
    Ambassadors, Secretaries (Chicago: 2002). On the explosion of
    ephemeral reference literature, and utility of digital distant
    reading approaches, see Francesca Trivellato, The Promise and Peril
    of Credit (Princeton: 2019).

[^22]: This data has then been parsed by hand. Every entry of "From
    Bologna to Rome," for example, registers as a single route, while
    entries with explicit intermediaries such as "Bologna to Rome via
    Florence," appear as a different route, as does the journey "From
    Rome to Bologna." It would be possible to review and revise this
    route list by hand, but the itinerary creator's decision to
    designate a route by one name or the other (and its implicit
    valuation of Florence) would be lost. Similarly, it would be
    possible to distinguish "From Bologna to Rome" by one set of
    intermediary stops (unnamed in the header) from another. In this
    case, I have opted avoid introducing new layers of differentiation
    and interpretation into the dataset. At times the origin or
    destination needed to be inferred. Publisher Charles Estienne, for
    example, titled his journeys without naming the origin location,
    appearing as "a Clermont par Lyon." When possible, locations with
    variant spellings were reconciled and matched to modern coordinates.

[^23]: Historians of print often refer back to the work of sociologists
    and philosophers on this point. See Michele Foucault, The Order of
    Things: An Archaeology of the Human Sciences, (New York: 1970) and
    Jacques Derrida, Writing and Difference (Chicago: 1970). Ann Blair,
    Too Much to Know: Managing Scholarly Information before the Modern
    Age (New Haven: 2010); Anthony Grafton, The Footnote: A Curious
    History (Cambridge, Mass: 1997).

[^24]: In this they differed a great deal from cosmographers and
    cartographers. See for contrast Jordan Branch, "Mapping the
    Sovereign State: Technology, Authority, and Systemic Change",
    International Organization 65 (Winter 2011): 1-36; Denis Cosgrover,
    "Globalism and Tolerance in Early Modern Geography" Annals of the
    Association of American Geographers 93 4 (Dec. 2003): 852-870.

[^25]: Many authors have established the propagandizing power of early
    modern cartography. See for example Jo Guldi, Roads to Power:
    Britain Invents the Infrastructure State (Cambridge, Mass.: 2012).
    Katharina Piechocki similarly advocates the deeper consideration of
    humanist literary genres vis a vis European identity but does not
    address itinerary publication: Katharina N. Piechocki, Cartographic
    Humanism (Chicago: 2020).

[^26]: Wide-scale digitization projects that have made such an
    international bibliography possible: Google Books, Munchener
    DigitilaisierungsZentrum Digitale Bibliothek, Digitalisierte
    Sammlungen Staatsbibliothek zu Berlin, Gallica, Biblioteca Digital
    Hispanica, and Early English Books Online. For ease of reference,
    books are referred to by their short title and date of first
    publication, while the appendix provides the complete bibliography.

[^27]: By 1507, the Tassis family had established a headquarters in
    Brussels, where a branch resided until 1702. Wolfgang Behringer,
    Thurn und Taxis (Munich:1990).

[^28]: Richard Vertstegan \[Richard Rowlands\], The Posts of the World
    (London: Richard Rowlands, 1576); J.W. Gent, The European Mercury
    Describing the Highwayes and Stages from Place to Place\... (I.R.
    for H. Twyford, 1641). Twyford was also notably involved in the
    production of an English translation of Schottus, Edmund Warcupp,
    Italy in its Original Glory (London:S. Griffin; H. Twyford, 1660).

[^29]: The posts were originally added by the Verona publisher Francesco
    Bolzetta in the italian edition. Franciscus Schottus, Itinerario
    overo nova descrittione (Venice: Bolzetta, 1610).

[^30]: This explanation remains imperfect, as books such as Gerrit
    Verhoeven, Diane Webb, Europe Within Reach: Netherlandish Travellers
    on the Grand Tour and Beyond (1585-1750) (Leiden: 2015) chart a
    rising interest in travel to France and Italy among early Dutch
    tourists. On Spanish New World geographical surveys, see Barbara E.
    Mundy, The Mapping of New Spain: Indigenous Cartography and the Maps
    of the Relaciones Geográficas (Chicago: 1996). On the Swedish posts,
    see Heiko Droste, "Sending a Letter between Amsterdam and Stockholm:
    A Matter of Trust and Precaution" in Cools et al., Your Humble
    Servant, 135-148.

[^31]: Kellen Funk and Lincoln A. Mullen similarly measure textual
    relationships in nineteenth century legal codification in "The Spine
    of American Law: Digital Text Analysis and U.S. Legal Practice," The
    American Historical Review, 123 1 (February 2018): 132-164. See also
    findings from the "Viral Texts Project", David A. Smith, Ryan
    Cordell, Abby Mullen, "Computational Methods for Uncovering
    Reprinted Texts in Antebellum Newspapers," American Literary History
    27 3 (Fall 2015): E1--E15.

[^32]: Ottavio Codogno's Nuovo itinerario (1608) included 45 of 135
    routes found in dal'Herba & Stella (33%), James Wadsworth's The
    European Mercury (1641) included 57 (42%), Alonso Meneses' Memorial
    õ abecedario de los mas principales caminos de España (1568)
    included 53 (34%), and Gilbert-Saulnier du Verdier's Le Voyage de
    France and Thomas Mayenne Turquet's Sommaire Description (1604)
    included the same 34 (25%). It is possible that even Dal'Herba &
    Stella had incorporated an earlier anonymous Itinerario (1550). For
    more on James Wadsworth, see A.J. Loomie, "Wadsworth, James \[pseud.
    Diego de Vadesfoote\]" (Sept 23 2004), in the Oxford Dictionary of
    National Biography, at http://odnb.com. Wadsworth's publisher, H.
    Twyford, was also notably involved in the production of an English
    translation of Schottus, Edmund Warcupp, Italy in its Original Glory
    (London: S. Griffin; H. Twyford, 1660).

[^33]: The route first appeared in the anonymous Itinerario (1562), then
    future editions of dal'Herba & Stella's Itinerario (1563), Codogno's
    Itinerario (1608), and Wadsworth's European Mercury (1641). It was
    then added to new editions of Schottus' Itinerario (1649: Francesco
    Bolzetta, Padua).

[^34]: While I have been unable to consult a 1576 edition, Verstegan's
    Post included 116 routes of the 155 found in a 1612 edition of
    Mayr's Wegbuchlein--- more than two-thirds of the original. For more
    on Verstegan, see Paul Arblaster, Antwerp & the World: Richard
    Verstegan and the International Culture of Catholic Reformation
    (Leuven: 2004).

[^35]: In this case, it seems likely that Codogno was the responsible
    agent rather than the publisher. Rachel Midura, "The Baroque Post,"
    in Paula Findlen and Suzanne Sutherlands ed.s, The Renaissance of
    Letters (London: 2019).

[^36]: Codogno's Nuovo Itinerario (1616) had 18 routes in common with
    Gail's Reisebuchlein (1563), many but not all of which are also
    featured in Mayr's Wegbuchlin (1612), suggesting Gail may have been
    Codogno's source. Nuovo itinerario (1616) also had 18 new routes in
    common with Mayenne's Sommaire description (1604), only three of
    which were also present in Gail. As the postmaster lieutenant of
    Milan, it is entirely believable that Codogno would have collected
    such itineraries--- the prose section of his itinerary, particularly
    in the 1616 edition, includes quotations from newly published works
    addressing the history of the post in Italy and Spain. Midura, "The
    Baroque Post." On Codogno, see Marco Gerosa, La famiglia Tasso e le
    poste dello Stato di Milano in età Spagnola (1556-1650) (Camerata
    Cornello: 2019); Clemente Fedele, Armando Serra, and Marco Gerosa,
    ed.s, Europa Postale (Camerata Cornello: 2014). On Mayenne, see Hugh
    Trevor-Roper, Europe's Physician: The Various Life of Sir Theodor de
    Mayenne (Yale: 2006).

[^37]: Mayenne's Sommaire description (1604) had 31 routes in common
    with Georg Mayr's Wegbuchlin (1578).

[^38]: A random sample of 100 cells from an adjacency matrix of common
    routes by editions (excluding editions of the same titles) produces
    an average commonality of 7.33 routes between itineraries by
    different authors.

[^39]: Benoit Rigaud, La Suite de la guides chemins tant France,
    d\'Espagne, Italie, et autres pays (Lyon: Benoit Rigaud, 1583).
    Midura, "Masters of the Post," 311.

[^40]: "per dove altre volte v\'erano le poste, & hor no" in Schottus,
    Itinerario (1610), 6 & Schottus, Itinerario (1675), 20. Codogno also
    notably included the route "where there should be posts" ("dove
    solevano essere le Poste") Nuovo itinerario (1608), 229.

[^41]: In many cases the publisher appears to have dropped intermediary
    locations from the header, instead opting to change a route of
    Angers to Saint Paul via Nantes to a simplified Angers to Saint
    Paul, for example. Several routes originating from
    Molines-en-Queyras were dropped entirely, while additional routes
    were added from Montélimar and Montereau. The titles of Estienne's
    Guide did generally reflect these changes, advertising how each had
    been "corrected and augmented," in up to four iterations by 1565. On
    Charles Estienne's Guide, see Jean Bonnerot, ed., La guide des
    chemins de France de 1553 (Paris: Champion, 1978) and Abel Lefrance,
    "La Guide des Chemins de France de Charles Estienne," Revue du
    Seizieme siècle 1 (1913): 19-27. See also Fordham, "Les routes de
    France"; "The Earliest French Itineraries."

[^42]: Schottus' Itinerari (Rome: Michel' Angelo and Pier Vincenzo
    Rossi, 1700)

[^43]: The two books also had different publishers. Daniel
    Wintzenberger, Ein Naw Reyse Büchlein (Dresden: Matthes
    Stockell,1577) & Der Kramer und Kauffleute Reyse Büchlein (Dresden:
    Gimel Bergen, 1578).

[^44]: In Estienne's Guide (1553), for example, later editions reached
    as far as Cherbourg-Octeville to the North, Konstanz to the East,
    and Hondaribbia to the West. Some regional routes were dropped,
    particularly in the Nouvelle-Aquitaine and Auvergne-Rhone-Alpes
    regions. In the case of Wintzenberger's Kauffleute Reysebüchlein
    (1578), the second edition reached as far as Lyon and Madrid, as
    well as Sibiu and Belgrade. It dropped a number of more regional
    routes in modern Germany, Denmark and Czechia, with locations such
    as Odense, Lubeck, Oloumoc dropped entirely.

[^45]: For an introduction to the historical applications of network
    analysis, see Tom Brughmans, Anna Collar, and Fiona Coward, The
    Connected Past: Challenges to Network Studies in Archaeology and
    History (Oxford2016). See also Scott Weingart, "Demystifying
    Networks", scottbott.net (blog), December 14, 2011,
    http://www.scottbot.net/HIAL/index.html\@p=6279.html.

[^46]: The Fruchterman-Reingold layout applied here through Gephi is one
    of the most commonly applied. Thomas M.J. Fruchterman, Edward M
    Reingold, \"Graph Drawing by Force-Directed Placement,\" Software:
    Practice and Experience 21 11 (November 1991): 1129-1164.

[^47]: The desire for historical accuracy in national representations
    must be weighed against the accuracy and authority of available data
    and the limitations of a static visualization for conveying the
    shifting of political and cultural boundaries over time. In this
    case, modern national groupings represented the most neutral choice
    and could be drawn from the Geonames Gazetteer. The future
    possibilities for collaboration with historical gazetteers such as
    the Early Modern Places project from the Cultures of Knowledge and
    the World Historical Gazetteer could no doubt add greater depth and
    nuance to spatial analysis. Karl Grossner et al., World Historical
    Gazetteer, 2017-2020, http://whgazetteer.org/..

[^48]: Raymond and Moxham, ed.s, News Networks. Andrew Pettegree, The
    Invention of News: How the World came to Know About Itself (New
    Haven: 2014). The application of different layout algorithms will
    produce differing impressions, however the discussed visual traits
    remain largely consistent.

[^49]: The average degree across the original network is 5.48, the
    network modified to remove editions of Wintzenberger's Wegbuchlein
    (1572), Codogno's Nuovo Itinerario(1608), and the German edition of
    Giuseppe Miselli, "In einer Beschreibung dessen Reiche/ Provintzien
    und Städte" (Leipzig: Christian Coelii, 1687) has an average degree
    of 4.79. The overall degree of Leipzig changes from 116 to 70,
    Dresden from 137 to 72, and Milan from 105 to 32. Dresden and
    Leipzig remain among the top 5 nodes by degree and Milan among the
    top 30.

[^50]: The reconfiguration of Milan in histories of pan-European
    communication and exchange is a component of my other work. The
    predictive use of network models to draw conclusions regarding
    exchange, even in the face of uncertain survival rates, has been
    fruitfully applied by archaeologists for many decades. See
    particularly Philip Verhagen, Tom Brughmans, Laure Nuninger,
    Frederique Bertoncello, "The Long and Winding Road: Combining Least
    Cost Paths and Network Analysis Techniques for Settlement Location
    Analysis and Predictive Modeling," Proceedings of the 40th
    Conference in Computer Applications and Quantitative Methods in
    Archaeology, Southhampton, United Kingdom, (March 26-30 2012). See
    also Carl Knappet, ed., Network Analysis in Archaeology: New
    Approaches to Regional Interaction (Oxford: 2013) and Justin
    Leidwanger, Carl Knappet, ed.s, Maritime Networks in the Ancient
    Mediterranean World (New York: 2018).

[^51]: E. John B Allen, Post and Courier Service in the Diplomacy of
    Early Modern Europe (The Hague: 1973), 58.

[^52]: The bibliography on Social Network Analysis is extensive, however
    common references include social scientists such as Albert-Lászlo
    Barabási and Duncan Watts. For an overview of approached in history,
    see Marten Düring and Martin Stark, "Historical Network Analysis,"
    (2011) in George A. Barnett, Encyclopedia of Social Networks
    (London: 2003).

[^53]: Collar et al. Provide the following definition: "a node's
    betweenness centrality is defined as the fraction of the number of
    geodesics" \['the path between a pair of nodes with the shortest
    path length'\] "through this node over the number of geodesics
    between all pairs of nodes in the network." Collar et al., Networks
    in Archaeology, 17-21; Ulrik Brandes, "A Faster Algorithm for
    Betweenness Centrality" Journal of Mathematical Sociology 25 2
    (2001):163-177.

[^54]: Mirabilia Urbis Romae circulated widely in the twelfth century,
    while the Aymeric Picaud's account of the path of Saint James
    appears as the fifth book in the Codex Calixtinus, likely dating to
    around 1140. See also the first printed version, Hermann Kunig,
    Walfahrt und Strass nach St. Jakob (Strasbourg:1495).

[^55]: Carlos Estepa Díez, Pascual Martínez Sopena, Cristina Jular
    Pérez-Alfaro, ed.s, El Camino de Santiago: Estudios sobre
    peregrinacion y sociedad, (Madrid: 2000); Luis Vazquez de Parga,
    Jose M Lacarra, Juan Uria Riu, ed.s, Las Peregrinaciones a Santiago
    de Compostela (Pamplona: 1998); Martínez-Morás Lopez, Marina
    Meléndez Cabo Santiago, Gerardo Pérez Barcala, and César Olivera
    Serrano, Identidad europea e intercambios culturales en el Camino de
    Santiago (siglos XI-XV) (Santiago de Compostela: 2013); Pascual
    Martinez Sopena, "El Camino de Santiago, entre lose caminos de la
    Espana medieval: Von der Antike bis in die Frühe Neuzeit," in Thomas
    Szabo, ed., Die Welt der Europäischen Strassen (Koln; Weimar; Wien:
    2009).

[^56]: Collar et al. provide the following definition: "The eigenvector
    centrality of a node is defined in terms of the eigenvector
    centrality of nodes incident on it... a node with a high eigenvector
    centrality is a node that is connected to other nodes with a high
    eigenvector centrality." Collar et al., Networks in Archaeology, 21.

[^57]: Uwe A. Oster, ed., Wege uber die Alpen (Darmstadt: 2006).

[^58]: Compare for example to the examples present in Raymond and
    Moxham, ed.s, News Networks. With thanks to Yann Ryan for sharing
    his work on the Moderate Intelligencer. See Newspaper Windows,
    Wordpress.com, 2015-2017, accessed at
    [<https://newspaperwindows.wordpress.com/> on 8/8/19]

[^59]: Peter Hamish Wilson, The Thirty Years War: Europe's Tragedy
    (Cambridge, Mass: 2011); Geoffrey Parker, The Thirty Years' War (New
    York: 1988). For a work that focuses on a lesser-known, but crucial
    Alpine arena of the Thirty Years War, see Randolph Head, Jenatsch's
    Axe: Social Boundaries, Identity, and Myth in the Era of the Thirty
    Years' War (Rochester: 2016).

[^60]: Jayne Boys, London's News Press and the Thirty Years' War,
    (Woodbridge: Boydell Press, 2011). Raymond and Moxham, News
    Networks; On contemporary views on the Grisons, see Randolph Head,
    Early Modern Democracy in the Grisons: Social Order and Political
    Language in a Swiss Mountain Canton, 1470-1620 (Cambridge: 1995).

[^61]: Ibid., 15.

[^62]: Biblioteca del Museo Correr, MS. Cicogna 2532. The volume is
    simply labeled "Scritture, Lettere e Affari," but the document in
    question likely dates to the 1670s.

[^63]: Giovanni Torriano, "Il forastiero smarrita la strada discorre con
    un contadino ricercandolo di quella/A stranger having lost his way
    speaks with a husbandman enquiring about it" & "Il Forestiero
    pattuisce con un capo vetturino Italiano interono al nollo di
    cavalli/ A stranger bargains with an Italian head-hacknyman about
    horse-hire" in Della Lingua Toscana-Romana, or, An Introduction to
    the Italian Tongue... (London: Printed for J. Martin and J.
    Allestrye, 1657), 38-40, 59-61.

[^64]: "Il Forastiero discorre con un camerata Italiano per viaggo/A
    Stranger discourses with an Italian Comrade upon the way" in Ibid.,
    138.

[^65]: To be treated in my forthcoming work. See particularly the
    letters of the Spanish postmaster general, Juan de Taxis di Peralta
    y Villamediana, in Archivo General de Simancas, Consejo de Estado,
    1899, 62, which explicitly reference the "list of the lieutenant to
    the Postmaster of Milan," likely Codogno's Nuovo Itinerario (1608).

[^66]: This example is located in the Biblioteca Nacional de Espana and
    visible via digitized microfilm at
    http://bdh.bne.es/bnesearch/detalle/bdh0000061963.

[^67]: Filippo de Vivo, "Microhistories of Long-Distance Information:
    Space, Movement and Agency in the Early Modern News."

[^68]: The contributors to Raymond & Moxham, News Networks found similar
    evidence from news networks: "Paul Arblaster has remarked that the
    'reintegration' of Spain within large international postal networks
    only occurred after 1650. Stéphane Haffemayer points out that Spain
    sent out no news on its own account before 1659. This implies that,
    before that date, information about Spain that reached European
    newspapers arrived through other intermediaries, mostly Italian,
    French and Flemish, and with some delay when compared with
    communication from other peripheral lands." in Schobesberger et al.,
    "European Postal Networks," 41.

[^69]: On Habsburg Spain's relationship with its Italian territories,
    see Thomas James Dandelet, John A. Marino, ed.s, Spain in Italy:
    Politics, Society, and Religion 1500-1700 (Leiden: 2007). On the
    relationship between the Austrian Habsburgs and the Holy Roman
    Empire, see R. J. W. Evans, T. V. Thomas, ed.s,  Crown, Church and
    Estates: Central European Politics in the Sixteenth and Seventeenth
    Centuries. (London: 1991).

[^70]: Parker, Thirty Years'War.

[^71]: "Poste da Milano a Madrid per altro camino quando i Francesi lo
    lascia fare, & il più breve" in Codogno, Nuovo itinerario (1608),
    151-152.

[^72]: James Wadsworth, "Dedicatory," The European Mercury (1641).
    Codogno, Nuovo itinerario (Venice: Lucio Spineda, 1611).

[^73]: On the concept of imagined community, see Benedict Anderson,
    Imagined Communities: Reflections on the Origin and Spread of
    Nationalism (London; New York: 1983). Cameron Blevins takes a
    similar approach in "Space, Nation, and the Triumph of Region: A
    View of the World from Houston," Journal of American History 101 1
    (June 2014): 122-147.

[^74]: Occasionally inertia did win out, as in the case of Wadsworth's
    adaptation of the continental itineraries for a British audience. He
    did explicitly instruct them to "flip" the routes as necessary,
    suggesting that this was not common practice. "Imprimis, let him
    note that the stages beginning at Rome, and continuing thence to
    Bruxells or Pairs, you must take them backward, beginning at Bruxell
    or Paris, and so to Rome." In Wadsworth, "The Translator to the
    Reader," Posts (1641).

[^75]: Patricia Ferreira-Lopes and Francisco Pinto-Puerto discuss the
    difficulty of interpreting temporally-specific spatial data,
    particularly in the case of utilizing Juan Villuga's Repertorio:
    Patricia Ferreira-Lopes, Francisco Pinto-Puerto "GIS and graph
    models for social, temporal and spatial digital analysis in
    heritage: The Case-Study of Ancient Kingdom of Seville Late Gothic
    Production" in Digital Applications in Archaeology and Cultural
    Heritage 9 (2018).

[^76]: Dynamic network analysis remains a growing field, but several
    pieces of scholarship have already demonstrated the great promise of
    bringing a temporal dimension to bear on network analysis. See Ruth
    Ahnert, Sebastian Ahnert, "Protestant Letter Networks in the Reign
    of Mary: A Quantitative Approach," ELH 82 (2015): 1-33; Patricia
    Ferreira-Lopes, Francisco Pinto-Puerto, "GIS and Graph Models." This
    paper is also indebted to the tutorial by Alex Brey, \"Temporal
    Network Analysis with R,\" The Programming Historian 7 (2018), at
    https://programminghistorian.org/en/lessons/temporal-network-analysis-with-r.

[^77]: Giuseppe Miselli, Burratino veridico (Rome: Michel'Ercole, 1682),
    published the same year as (Rome: Nicolò L'hullié Libraro, 1682);
    Giovan Maria Vidari, Viaggio in pratica (Naples: Francesco
    Ricciardo, 1718).

[^78]: Lyon and Milan had estimated populations of around 70,000, likely
    in the top ten major cities in Europe in the period, however still
    significantly less than Paris' 130,000, for example. Jan De Vries,
    European Urbanization: 1500-1800 (London: 1984).

[^79]: 160 of the 453 routes (35%) added from 1560-1580 can be
    identified as international, as opposed to 33 of 427 from before
    (1545-1559). As noted, it was deemed most appropriate to use modern
    nationalities, although the term "international" is therefore
    somewhat anachronistic here. Given the smaller size of contemporary
    sovereignties, it would be safe to assume that the overall
    percentage would be higher using contemporary boundaries, however I
    believe the relative proportions of one period compared to another
    would remain similar.

[^80]: Codogno compared the choice of a postmaster to that of elected
    rulers and popes, in that "how, and who they are, concerns the
    interests of all" and lauded the Tassis for their accomplishments in
    connecting all of Europe, "not just for the convenience of their
    princes and lords, but also for the common good (commune utilità) of
    all men of business (negotianti)." Codogno, Nuovo itinerario (1608),
    15.

[^81]: Discussion of the road and its impact on the outcomes of Spanish
    imperial ventures is famously associated with Geoffrey Parker, who
    defined the route more precisely as through Genoa, Mont Cenis,
    Turin, Lorraine, and Luxembourg. The contributors to News Networks
    prefer to refer to the road in the plural in most cases, see
    Schobesberger et al., "European Postal Networks", 42. Geoffrey
    Parker, Europe in Crisis 1598-1648 (Oxford: 1979).

[^82]: Strasburg shows notable increases in degree, betweenness
    centrality, and eigenvector centrality, peaking in 1600.

[^83]: "Simplon" referring to either the town or pass increased in
    degree, betweenness centrality and eigenvector centrality from 1600
    forward.

[^84]: Genoa follows a notably anomalous pattern over time with
    increasing eigenvector centrality and decreasing betweenness
    centrality. The pattern is suggestive of how the itineraries
    privileged land-based travel over travel by sea, but the major
    capitals of Madrid and Rome were periodically only reachable by such
    routes. Prague by comparison increased in degree substantially from
    1600-1620, but saw a steady decline in the number of routes from
    that point forward, even as both centrality scores continued to
    increase. The pattern is suggestive of an overall decrease in the
    diversity of routes through eastern Europe, particularly to and from
    Poland.

[^85]: In 1680, 92 nodes are active, by comparison to the 323 active in
    1600.

[^86]: Hamburg, Frankfurt, Augsburg and Nurnberg all came under Swedish
    occupation from 1629 forward. The resistance to the Thurn und Taxis
    Post (now dubbed the Reichspost) was formalized at a conference
    among the Protestant postal systems in 1658. Behringer, Im Zeichen
    des Merkur. See also Behringer, "Landespost."

[^87]: Wintzenberger, Buchlein (Dreden: Stockel, 1577), (Dresden:
    Bergen, 1578 & 1579); Miselli, In einer Beschreibung dessen Reiche,
    Provintzien und Städt (Leipzig: Coelii, 1687).

[^88]: Caizzi, Dalla posta dei; Leuzinger & Oster, Wege.

[^89]: This effect remains constant even when single-author published
    routes are represented as well.

[^90]: Codogno, Nuovo itinerario (Venice: Stefano Curti, 1676), 402,
    415-416,427.

[^91]: Miselli, Burattino veridico (1684), 369.

[^92]: While the overall degree dropped for Leipzig, and eigenvector
    centrality remained roughly constant, betweenness centrality
    increased steadily over the course of the seventeenth century.

[^93]: Schobesberger et al. note a similar phenomenon: "Just before the
    beginning of the Thirty Years War, the post house in Frankfurt
    replaced Augsburg as the most important centre in the German postal
    network." The itinerary data however suggests that this shift is
    better periodized later in the century, at least as far as the
    perception by itinerary creators is involved. Nikolaus
    Schobesberger, Paul Arblaster, Mario Infelise, André Belo, Noah
    Moxham, Carmen Espejo and Joad Raymond, "European Postal Networks"
    in Raymond & Moxham, News Networks, 22.

[^94]: The itineraries support a slightly different periodization than
    that put forward by Martin Dallmeier, who indicates that Frankfurt
    overtook Augsburg in importance by the establishment of new post
    courses in 1616. Martin Dallmeier, 500 Jahre Post- Thurn und Taxis:
    Ausstellung Furstliches Marstallmuseum Regensburg 12 Mai bis 29 Juli
    1990 (Regensburg: 1990), 3. On the avoidance of Cologne in the
    1640s, see Behringer, Thurn und Taxis, 90.

[^95]: Nicolas Sanson, Carte Geographicque des Postes qui traversent la
    France (Paris: Tavernier, 1632). Held at Princeton Historical Map
    Collection, HM 2011-36. G. Arbellot, w, XVIIe-XIXe siècle (Paris:
    1992).

[^96]: The 1980s and 1990s saw a particular flourishing of
    interdisciplinary work on the subject as a part of the "spatial
    turn," including: Michael Biggs, "Putting the State on the Map:
    Cartography, Territory and European State Formation, Comparative
    Studies in Society and History 41 2, (1999): 374-405.; Jeremy Black,
    Maps and Politics (Chicago: 1997); David Buisseret, Monarchs,
    Ministers, and Maps: The Emergence of Cartography as a Tool of
    Government in Early Modern Europe (Chicago: 1992); James Akerman,
    "Cartography and the Emergence of Territorial States in Western
    Europe" in John F. Sweets, ed., Proceedings of the Tenth Annual
    Meeting of the Western Society for French History (Lawrence:1984),
    138-54. For more recent work, see James C. Scott, Seeing Like a
    State: How Certain Schemes to Improve the Human Condition Have
    Failed (New Haven: 2008). F. Driver, Geography Militant: Cultures of
    Exploration and Empire (Oxford: 2000); J. Headley, "Geography and
    Empire in the Late Renaissance: Botero's Assignment, Western
    Universalism and the Civilizing Process" Renaissance Quarterly 53:
    1119-1155.

[^97]: Oceanic Exchanges Project Team, 2017. Oceanic Exchanges: Tracing
    Global Information Networks in Historical Newspaper Repositories,
    1840-1914, [osf.io/wa94s](https://osf.io/wa94s).
