---
title: "Where is America in the Republic of Letters?"
weight: 11
subtitle:
doi: http://thelinktothisarticlehere
draft: false
author: 
- name: Caroline Winterer
  affiliation: Stanford University
  email: cwinterer@stanford.edu
citation:
- author: Winterer, Caroline
  title: "Where is America in the Republic of Letters"
  journal: Modern Intellectual History
  year: 2021
  volume: 9
  issue: 3
  pages: 597-623
  doi: http://doi.org/10.1017/S1479244312000212

---

{{% notation title="Headnote" %}}

I am an intellectual historian of eighteenth- and nineteenth-century
North America, but before this project, I had never really focused on
Benjamin Franklin for my own research. I chose Ben Franklin simply
because his digital papers were freely available at:
[<https://franklinpapers.yale.edu/>.] You didn't need a paid
subscription as you did for some of the other "founding fathers." The
impulse was a populist one, basically saying to the world: try this at
home. I remain grateful for the then-doctoral students, now PhDs, who
worked very hard on this project and contributed numerous insights:
Claire Rydell Arcenas, Julia Mansfield, and Scott Spillman. The Ben
Franklin project was part of a group of projects in Stanford's Mapping
the Republic of Letters project (hereafter MRofL), which launched in
2010. Other projects examined the letters of Voltaire and the
itineraries of the Grand Tour, *inter alia*. MRofL benefited from
shared resources, including technology experts and a new physical space
at the Center for Spatial and Textual Analysis (aka the digital
humanities laboratory at Stanford). The hope was to exploit the recent
digitization of large numbers of early modern letters from Europe and
the Americas.

We seized on the idea of visualization, rather than, say, keyword
searching, since at that time visualization was still a fairly new idea,
and it could be done quickly. Nearly everyone on the project was
pursuing this as a side line of research rather than as their main
scholarly project, so we were eager to take some quick core samples to
see if DH was worth our time and energy. We experimented with various
kinds of visualizations, with geospatial analysis being among the most
popular, since these maps so immediately challenged some of our
conceptions of how our various historical actors had operated. The
apparently cosmopolitan Voltaire, for example, exchanged almost no
letters with people in the New World.

When we began, none of us had historiographical interventions in mind.
We were just eager to see how coping with much larger numbers of texts
than we normally did might yield some new insights. It was only after
working on the project for a few years that we began to grope toward the
idea of making some historiographical interventions in our various
domains. A few of us on the Franklin project started writing up an
article about how this DH approach shed new light on a person that we
thought we knew so well. The article met with great skepticism from
reviewers, however, and it remains unpublished, even as bits and pieces
of the overall argument have been presented in various public talks.

From the start, as the unpublished Franklin article reveals, there was a
combination of skepticism and excitement about MRofL from historians and
the general public. Were we just pouring old wine into new bottles? We
also shared these concerns. The project resembled in some ways the
social history of the 1960s through 1980s, which plumbed archival
sources to shed light on domains beyond traditional political history.
We thought a lot about how MRofL was and wasn't different. We eventually
published a group-authored overview of MRofL and its methodology and
early results: see Giovanna Ceserani, Dan Edelstein, Paula Findlen,
Caroline Winterer, and Nicole Coleman, "Historical Research in a Digital
Age: Reflections on the Mapping the Republic of Letters Project."
*American Historical Review* 122, 2 (April 2017): 400-424.

{{% /notation %}}

Where is America in the republic of letters? This question has formed in
my mind over the last four years as I have collaborated on a new project
based at Stanford University called "Mapping the Republic of Letters."
The project aims to enrich our understanding of the intellectual
networks of major and minor figures in the republic of letters, the
international world of learning that spanned the centuries roughly
1400-1800. By creating visual images based on large digitized data sets,
we hope to reveal the hidden structures and conditions that nourished
the growth of the republic of letters in the early modern era and the
causes of its transformation in the nineteenth century. This task has
only recently become feasible with the digitization of the
correspondences of major intellectuals such as Benjamin Franklin, John
Locke, Athanasius Kircher, and Voltaire, and of libraries, cabinets of
artifacts, and Grand Tour itineraries.

This essay has two purposes. The first is to explore how the analytic
category of the republic of letters can help to transcend some of the
limitations of the Atlantic world, one of early Americanists' currently
dominant paradigms. To scholars of Renaissance and early modern Europe,
the idea of a republic of letters seems obvious, natural, and well
documented. To historians of early America---even intellectual
historians---the category is much less familiar. I have often found
myself asking whether the Americas formed part of this thing we were
calling the republic of letters, and if so how and when. This article
examines the ways in which early Americans participated (or hoped to) in
the ideal of the republic of letters, and the specific geographical,
political, religious, and historical circumstances of early America that
shaped that participation. Because my own specialty is British America,
the major focus will be on that area, but some of the considerations are
also applicable to French and Spanish America. Along the way I examine
several recent works in the field that open up new questions and
methodologies for our consideration.[^1]

{{% notation title="DH as Public History?" %}}

Non-academics were intrigued by this new approach to the familiar figure
of Ben Franklin, who was now situated in a different context than was
customary. They also saw a fresh question that was relevant to our own
time: did Franklin have a social network just like we did? Did this
modern phenomenon of social networks have a history? Are letter networks
the same as social networks? Could we imagine a time before social
networks---and when was that time? Did Jesus have a social network? Did
the pharaohs? The Franklin project ended up being featured in
*Smithsonian Magazine* under the title, "Dear Sir, Ben Franklin
Would Like to Add You to His Network":
[https://www.smithsonianmag.com/innovation/dear-sir-ben-franklin-would-like-to-add-you-to-his-network-180947639/](https://www.smithsonianmag.com/innovation/dear-sir-ben-franklin-would-like-to-add-you-to-his-network-180947639/).
For me, this experience raises a larger question for the field of DH:
how best to address public audiences with its findings. DH can provide
attractive graphics, which capture complex historical processes in a
tidy package. An example of DH's public reach with haunting graphics is
Slave Voyages:
[https://www.slavevoyages.org/](https://www.slavevoyages.org/).
But a lot of the general public loves prose history, and DH can, to some
readers, lack the gripping yarn they're looking for. I think it remains
an open question for us academic historians. We have a new tool in our
toolbox: what will we build with it, and who will we build it for?

{{% /notation %}}

The second purpose it to explore the prospects and limits of digitally
mapping the republic of letters. This can mean anything from
geographical mapping (such as placing correspondence networks on a map
of the Earth) to bar graphs and pie charts (which show things like the
popularity of certain books at certain times and places), to a variety
of frankly exotic representations that, like Maya glyphs, take some time
to learn how to decode. What all these have in common is the ability to
reframe our textual archive in a spatial dimension.

{{% notation title="The Difference a Decade Makes" %}}

Reading this paragraph, written when Ngram was shiny and new, is a
reminder of how much DH has ripened as a field. We're now able to look
back at some trends and reflect on how they have and haven't changed our
thinking. My colleague Kären Wigen and I recently held a conference at
the David Rumsey Map Center
([[https://library.stanford.edu/rumsey](https://library.stanford.edu/rumsey))---which
has digitized thousands of historical maps---on how the recent
digitization of maps has also revealed "traditional" (pre-digital) maps
in a new light. See *Time in Maps: From the Age of Discovery to Our Digital Era*, ed. Kären Wigen and Caroline Winterer (Chicago,
2020).

Also, I was surprised at how many people in the last decade asked me
whether I had actually read Franklin's letters, or whether (as one
person put it) I just dumped the metadata into a computer and pushed the
"on" button, like ice cubes in a blender. Metadata (as I learned) is
data about data. So instead of analyzing the full text (aka "reading"),
we were gathering information about categories: who was sending letters
to Franklin; how many were British-American; how old were they; what was
their gender; what language were they writing in; etc. This was
extremely revelatory in some ways. It turned out, for example, that in
our focus time period of 1757-1775, the years Franklin lived mostly in
London, very few women corresponded with him, but those who did (his
wife; his landlady's daughter; his sister) corresponded a lot. This
opened up all kinds of new questions about the role of women in
Franklin's correspondence network and his life more generally. Then we
could go back and reread those particular letters to see if the content
of the letters themselves shed light on the pattern revealed by the
metadata. Sometimes it did, sometimes it didn't. To take a case where
the metadata did reveal a new insight, a closer look at Deborah Read
Franklin's letters to and from her husband showed that she performed a
crucial "LinkedIn" function, providing young men leaving the port of
Philadelphia with letters of introduction to Ben Franklin in London.

One takeaway from this project for me at least was that metadata
analysis and text analysis should probably be done in tandem, so that DH
doesn't make you pursue weird postulates that defy a historian's common
sense. My sense is that more and more scholars are pursuing DH projects
in this way: not as an end in themselves, but as part of a larger
project.

{{% /notation %}}

We have good reasons to be wary of what digitization and visualization
can offer us. The insights of the humanist take years to accumulate; we
have a feel for our time period and our people that numbers and graphs
and maps simply do not capture, one that is born of long hours spent
reading and thinking about the complicated textual and intellectual
problems that the past presents to us. Innovations such as Google's
NGram---plug in the word 'nature' and instantly chart its
appearance in millions of texts---both thrill and trouble us. Something
is not quite right: but what?

The main problem is that digitizing humanistic data forces
black-and-white answers onto the kinds of grey-area questions that
historians usually delight in tackling. First, we can only visualize
data points, discrete bits of factual information such as location or
person or date. Yet much of what we want to learn about the republic of
letters is hard to whittle down to a data point. Nationality, for
example, which can help us to gauge how multinational a person's letter
network might have been, is difficult to assign for the early modern
period. Is Thomas Jefferson British? American? British-American? British
then American? Virginian? Second, greater numerical specificity does not
in itself yield greater interpretive insight; it requires a larger
numerical context for interpretation. Three thousand books in a private
library is a large number for the year 1500, but not for the year 1800.
This means that for visualization projects to be successful, they need
to vacuum up enormous data sets: the projects will only yield their most
accurate and useful information sometime in the future. A final problem
is that visualization forces us to worry more about external aspects of
intellectual life (who wrote what letter when) than the internal ideas
(what the letter was about, and why the ideas in it might have mattered
so much that someone might die defending them). We cannot just digitize
and visualize data; we still need to read texts.

{{% notation title="What is the Purpose of Visualizations?" %}}

I wrote this paragraph in a moment of reckoning with (or maybe
frustration about) the avalanche of charts and tables and wiggly lines
emanating from our lab. Sometimes it seemed as though we were producing
visualizations as an end in themselves. The drive to visualization
remains an understandable tendency in DH. It is interesting to ponder
what kinds of visualizations best capture your evidence: a pie chart? a
graph? a map? That exercise alone, as a thinking exercise, is in itself
often very fruitful. And visualization seems like a tangible "result" or
"analysis." But is it? What should be the relationship between prose
analysis and visualization in DH?

We certainly struggled a lot with this question in the
as-yet-unpublished Benjamin Franklin article. When should the
visualizations *drive* the argument, and when should they
*illustrate* the argument? Obviously, you can't really draw a neat
line between those two processes, but still there is a difference that
will be familiar to any historian who uses maps in their research: when
are maps the objects about which you are making an argument, and when do
the maps merely provide the geographical setting for the argument you
are making? It was perhaps our inability to successfully answer that
question that explains why that Franklin article remains unpublished
today. I fear there was a hybrid quality to the article. Sometimes we
would begin with a strange or unexpected visualization and try to
explain it. At other times we would build a traditional historical
context for Benjamin Franklin, and then show how the visualization
either confirmed or refuted that context.

{{% /notation %}}

In short, visualization cannot and should not replace the traditional
work of the humanist. Visualization in fact is not the goal: the goal is
to develop new tools to expose the ephemeral traces of the past. Faced
with great gaps in our knowledge about the early modern world, the
visualization of a large data set can help us to glimpse large patterns
even when many specific bits of information are missing. Digitization
and visualization give us a new kind of context for apprehending the
ideas of the past. Cambridge University Press's "Ideas in Context" book
series (to take one example) offers one definition of context. "Through
detailed studies of the evolution of \[intellectual\] traditions, and
their modification by different audiences," its series website explains,
ideas are "set in the context of the alternatives available within the
contemporary frameworks of ideas and institutions."[^2] To Cambridge's
intellectual context of ideas and institutions, digitization and
visualization offer a different kind of context: numerical and
geographical frames of reference. Major interpretive questions such as
the existence of a particularly "American" Enlightenment can be more
precisely answered if basic factual questions are addressed, such as
which "Enlightenment" European texts Americans had in their libraries or
which European *philosophes* were personally known to Americans and
actively engaged in intellectual conversation with them. The
groundbreaking 1976 article by David Lundberg and Henry May, entitled
"The Enlightened Reader in America," exemplifies this painstaking
process, showing which libraries in America contained which
Enlightenment books from Europe.[^3] But with digitization this kind of
context can be established with greater depth and specificity across a
broader range of sources, both published and manuscript.

Like a satellite hovering above the Earth, visualization can help us to
see the big picture amid bewildering complexity and to detect new
patterns over time and space. Whether and how these new patterns matter
is our own decision as humanists to make, like the weatherman deciding
whether the white spot is just clouds or a potential hurricane.

## The Republic of Letters: Definition and Historiography

What was the *republic of letters*? This term refers to the
intellectual world that thrived before our modern academic disciplines
and more nationally bound scholarly institutional practices triumphed in
the later nineteenth century. During these earlier centuries, first in
Europe and then wherever around the globe Europeans brought their
scholarly practices, a more fluid model of intellectual activity engaged
learned men and women. This was the great age of the generalist, the
polymath, the *polyhistor*, adept in multiple fields of learning,
when one could still aspire to know everything. Learned people exchanged
books, letters, journals, antiquities, and scientific objects; they
organized learned societies, academies, universities, laboratories,
botanical gardens, and cabinets. To describe this delicate world, modern
historians have seized upon the metaphor of the web. Like spiders,
scholars carefully spun learned webs across great distances, hoping to
ensnare new ideas and objects, to neutralize rivals and promote
friends.[^4]

At the time, however, its members called this intellectual community a
republic---a striking term given that before the late eighteenth century
few of the participant states were in fact political republics in the
strict (kingless) sense of the term. There is a lot of evidence to
suggest that members applied the term *republic* loosely, as a
social and intellectual ideal of community rather than as a program of
political action. In an age of rigid social hierarchies, deadly wars of
religion, and emerging state censorship, early modern scholars invoked
the idea of republics to engage one another on terms of relative
equality and freedom. They grandiosely imagined the community of the
republic of letters to be universal in scope, extending beyond political
frontiers to create a utopian global literary world, or *orbis litterarius*[^5] Participants deployed a whole battery of
political terms---colony, ruler, frontier---to describe this
intellectual community, although it is not always clear whether they
were juxtaposing *republic* to monarchy, democracy, aristocracy, or
empire.[^6] They happily used non-republican terms to praise their
favorites. In the sixteenth century many agreed that Erasmus was the
prince of the republic of letters.[^7] By the eighteenth century
Voltaire had been crowned king, a truth that made John Adams grumble
from Paris that the republic of letters had degenerated into
monarchy.[^8] Although the precise causal connections between the
intellectual community of the republic of letters and the rise of the
first enduring modern political republics remain the subject of debate,
clearly at some level the rich intellectual setting of the first had
something to do with the flourishing of the second.

{{% notation title="DH and the Problem of Precision" %}}

The inability to determine when many of Ben Franklin's letters were sent
and/or received ended up driving us up the wall. Dates offer one of the
few solid data points on which to pin a visualization. Or do they? Are
dates really as solid as we think? First, we had to tackle the whole Old
Style/New Style problem, the Gregorian calendar reform that hit British
America in the middle of the 18^th^ century. Then we had to figure out
*how* a date mattered. Say Franklin dated a letter 8 October 1774.
But if that letter sat on a ship for 3 weeks awaiting favorable winds,
what then? This to me was an example of how digital history really makes
you rethink a lot of your reflexes and habits. For example, what
qualifies as an "event"? I did not address this question directly in
this article, but it was a major feature of the unpublished Franklin
article.

{{% /notation %}}

As these definitions of the republic of letters suggest, there was
always slippage between process and place. On the one hand, the republic
of letters embodied the airy ideal of egalitarianism. In theory, all
learned people could participate in this world of ideas. Yet the
realities of sheer distance, the vagaries of travel over seas and roads,
imperial and local politics, and institutions and personalities all
shaped the day-to-day operation of the disembodied republic of letters.
These factors also shaped our modern archive of the republic of letters.
Some documents and artifacts were widely and prominently disseminated.
Others were either entirely lost or left such ephemeral traces that it
is difficult to reconstruct critical aspects of their provenance, such
as the precise date on which a letter was sent or received.

For today's scholars of early modern Europe, the republic of letters is
a goldmine. In the last two decades, twenty-four books and seven
doctoral dissertations on European history have appeared with the words
"republic of letters" in the title.[^9] The quantitative organization
and spatial mapping of European republic of letters data has been going
on for at least fifteen years.[^10] The field is wide open, welcoming
both established scholars and new ones. The research program is
increasingly global, sending scholars to archives in China, Peru, India,
and the Middle East.[^11] These books join a host of studies that have
focused on smaller units in the republic of letters, be they individual
scholars or regions and states.[^12] The modern scholars who study the
European republic of letters are as international as their subject. They
include not just American scholars in American universities but European
scholars in European universities. They publish in French, Dutch,
German, Spanish, Italian, and English, mirroring in their polyglot
publications the historical subject they investigate.

{{% notation title="Disciplinary Divides and DH" %}}

The insight of the topic sentence below is a primitive use of DH: I
simply searched for the words "republic of letters" in databases. It
turned out Europeanists used it a lot, and Americanists almost never.

Nearly a decade after I published this article, I'm still waiting for us
to fully transcend the disciplinary divide between early Americanists
and early modern Europeanists (and among global early modernism more
generally). The Atlantic world paradigm helped to some degree. But we
still train students in mostly separate doctoral program tracks, hire
them into mostly separate fields, and the two fields still don't have
very many professional incentives to talk to each other more than they
have in the past. But the new linkages offered by DH may be one way in
which we quietly begin to break down these barriers. Finding that, say,
a Dutch scholar is in Franklin's letter network may send the researcher
into new historiographies about the Netherlands that open up new
research areas and new colleagues. By opening keyholes into the datasets
of scholars in other fields, if only incidentally or accidentally at
first, we may begin to see scholars grouping and regrouping in new ways
beyond their traditional disciplinary islands.

{{% /notation %}}

Not so for British America. In the last twenty years, the three words
*republic of letters* have appeared in the titles of just two books
on what might be called British American topics. In other words,
ninety-two percent of the English-language books on Euro-American topics
with the words *republic of letters* in the title published in the
last twenty years are essentially about Europe.[^13] Compare this to the
term *Atlantic world*, whose use in the titles of English-language
books about early America has surged. In the last twenty years,
sixty-five books (and nineteen doctoral dissertations) on subjects in
the early American field have the words *Atlantic world* in the
title.

Put bluntly, the Atlantic world has become an early Americanist's
category, while the republic of letters has become an early modern
Europeanist's category. I have had the opportunity to speculate with
some of my colleagues about why this might be so. One reason may be the
concept of European history itself: problematic and unstable as it is,
the idea of Europe encourages European historians to think across
national boundaries and to see Europe as more than the sum of national
histories. By contrast, colonial Americanists, always waiting in the
wings of the future United States, must wrestle with globalism and
empire as qualities that compete with an exclusive American nationalism.
Perhaps historians of early modern Europe have also been relatively less
smitten by the Atlantic world paradigm because of their greater
geographical range of intellectual options. Early modern Europeanists'
intellectual doors open up all over, for example to the Mediterranean
and East Asia, whereas for British Americanists the Atlantic remains the
intellectual front door until the end of the eighteenth century, when
the Pacific and Mediterranean begin to open more widely.[^14]

But what if we approach British American intellectual life as part of
the republic of letters instead of as part of an Atlantic world? What
looks different? What new questions and problems emerge? An example of
this kind of work is what has been accomplished in the last thirty years
or so with the history of the book, which has helped to enumerate
European-American connections with impressive precision.[^15] Yet we
still know relatively little---in terms of comparative, quantitative
data---about many other, more ephemeral features of the British-American
republic of letters, from the size and shape of individual
correspondence networks, to the content and circulation of book and
artifact collections, to the specifics of marginalia, to the travels of
intellectually inclined Americans in Europe. This essay will probe some
of these questions as they have been answered most recently by scholars
of the early modern Americas.

## England and London

{{% notation title="The Spatial Dimension of Ideas" %}}

This whole section, which is heavy on geography, ended up being really
fruitful for my thinking about the spatial dimensions of intellectual
life, and eventually became chapter 1 of my book, *American Enlightenments: Pursuing Happiness in the Age of Reason* (2016).
There, on page 29, I also printed one of the MRofL maps that compared
Franklin and Voltaire's correspondence networks (the same map appears
below). Placing their letter networks on a map of the North Atlantic
showed starkly that many of Franklin's letters crossed the Atlantic,
while only one of Voltaire's did. MRofL was, at bottom, an exercise in
exploring ideas cartographically. This ended up being central for my
thinking about what was and wasn't "American" about the Enlightenment.
There are many other ways that one could configure a DH project so that
intellectual life is spatialized in some way, however. Nicholas
Jenkins's "Kindred Britain"project is one way:
[https://kindred.stanford.edu/#](https://kindred.stanford.edu/)

{{% /notation %}}

The first feature that stands out when mapping British America in the
broader republic of letters is how England-centered it is. The
intellectual life of early America is best imagined first as part of a
narrowly British-American Atlantic *zone* and only second as part
of a broader Atlantic *world*[^16] The Atlantic world
paradigm---embracing the Americas, the Caribbean, Africa, Europe, and
the British Isles---has been extraordinarily fruitful for expanding the
questions and archives of scholars of early America who study slavery,
population migrations, ecological changes, and mercantile networks.

Intellectual historians, while profiting from this work, should however
handle the Atlantic world with care. The big, broad idea of an Atlantic
world can easily overstate the possibilities that were actually
available to learned British Americans for sustained intellectual
engagement with a larger learned world, as opposed to a larger
mercantile or political world (though obviously these overlapped to some
degree). These possibilities included the ability to receive new ideas
in a regular, timely, reasonably accessible, and predictable way; to
disseminate these ideas to others; and to participate in systems of
intellectual incentive and recognition, such as patronage, prizes, and
institutional membership. The ideas available to early Americans were
Atlantic and even global in their subject; some of them derived from
serious engagement with and among peoples we might not usually consider
to be part of the world of learning. But scholarship does not exist in a
vacuum. Learned people might have toiled on the fringes of empires, but
finally they needed to exchange their ideas with others in the physical
form of books, letters, journals, and objects along the highways of the
republic of letters.

For British Americans, many of these intellectual highways converged on
England, the commercial, publishing, and political hub of their empire.
Speaking broadly, by many relevant measures of intellectual life,
England dominated British America: in supplying books and journals to
the colonies; in providing an intellectual model of learning in
everything from law to science to *belles lettres*, in providing
financial and cultural patronage for artists---the list could go on.
Throughout the period to 1800, in ways both large and small, it was to
England that early Americans looked for so much of their intellectual
structure and content. Many not only looked but went, such as the
erudite planter Eliza Lucas Pinckney of South Carolina, who personally
presented birds from her colony to the dowager princess of Wales.

England's importance to British American intellectual life had a number
of consequences. It meant for example that the colonies only slowly
developed an inter-colonial rather than colony-to-Britain intellectual
life. Hugh Amory has argued that the first publication with an
inter-colonial imprint was *The American Magazine and Historical Chronicle* (1743-1746), which was sold in Boston, Philadelphia, New
York, New Haven, and Newport.[^17] Susan Scott Parrish has made the case
that the first sustained correspondence among inter-colonial men of
science such as Benjamin Franklin and Alexander Garden did not emerge
until the 1740s.[^18] Colonists in the British Caribbean---the
spectacular example of Alexander Hamilton notwithstanding---by far
preferred to send their sons to Britain for university training than to
the closer mainland American colonies.[^19]

These grand pronouncements about the importance of England must
immediately be qualified. First, England should be seen as peculiarly
but not uniquely important in British Americans' intellectual world;
British Americans' intellectual links were many and complicated. Some of
the more important of these links include the transnational confessional
community of the "Protestant international" that stretched from Boston
through London and into the Reformation Europe of the Low Countries and
Germany.[^20] As the eighteenth century passed, the Scottish
Enlightenment radiated outward from the universities of Glasgow,
Aberdeen and especially Edinburgh, a city Nicholas Phillipson has called
a "real republic of letters" in its own right.[^21] Learned Scots
migrated to various parts of British America, but the flow ran the other
way as well; by 1761 so many Virginians were enrolled at Edinburgh's
renowned medical school that they formed their own club.[^22] In the
American colonies themselves learned pockets supported a thriving, local
intellectual life: we should not necessarily think of transatlantic
connections as the only measure of British-American participation in the
broader republic of letters. The dense knot of seventeenth-century
Boston-Cambridge, for example, formed a world unto itself, with its
impossibly tangled intellectual and family trees.

## START HERE

{{% notation title="Ideas and Space" %}}

My metaphor in the topic sentence---that the way we understand something
is by projecting it onto a cartographic field---testifies to some larger
problems and opportunities in DH. The go-to background for a lot of our
spatial representations is a geographical one: we project things onto
maps. Some historians have gone so far as to say that all history is
really spatial history: you can't see time, but only time's effect on
space. That insight has produced some extraordinary and wonderful new
insights and projects, as in Stanford's Spatial History Project:
[http://web.stanford.edu/group/spatialhistory/cgi-bin/site/index.php](http://web.stanford.edu/group/spatialhistory/cgi-bin/site/index.php)
. But I wonder what this means for the history of ideas: how best to
spatially represent a person's ideas? When does geography matter---and
when is it a distraction from something else perhaps more important
going on?

{{% /notation %}}

Moving closer to our map it becomes clear that the core of early
American intellectual life was not so much England generally as London
specifically. By the middle of the eighteenth century, London had joined
Paris as a real behemoth in the republic of letters, the gigantic city
that was also a bustling political and intellectual center. Paris in
1750 had a population of around 570,000; London of 750,000.[^23] These
great cities could collect on an unprecedented scale many activities of
intellectual life: publishers, scholars, museums, cabinets, salons,
gardens, learned societies, and princely patrons. The confluence of
urbanization and intellectual life at this massive scale represented a
new formation in the republic of letters, which until then had been
represented by smaller cities and towns such as Leiden, Louvain, Aix,
Heidelberg.

London's importance in British American intellectual life swelled over
the course of the eighteenth century as the number of Americans visiting
London rose sharply. Julie Flavell has termed post-1763 London "the
capital of America," the place where Americans from all over the British
empire flocked for commercial, educational, cultural, and diplomatic
errands.[^24] London's intellectual supremacy was especially the case in
book publishing, which over the course of the seventeenth and especially
eighteenth centuries emerged as an ever more important river of
information dissemination of the republic of letters, supplementing
though not displacing other formats such as letter-writing. According to
James Raven, "Edinburgh, Dublin (at least before 1800), and Glasgow all
developed important book export businesses, but London remained the main
publishing source for the books, magazines, and other types of print
sent out to the British provinces and then to the colonies in North
America, the Caribbean, India, the United States, Africa, Australasia,
and the Far East."[^25] (The literary entrepôt of London often published
works that were not necessarily "English," however: editions of the
classics, French and Italian works, and the like.) Elite colonists from
the North American mainland and British Caribbean sent their sons for
legal training to the Inns of Court in London; Richard Beale Davis
counts nearly 200 Americans at the Inns of Court before the
Revolution.[^26] Catholics too---a persecuted minority in British
America---felt the pull of the great intellectual center of London.
Charles Carroll of Carrollton, Maryland, the Catholic signer of the
Declaration of Independence, received a truly exemplary education, first
in the Jesuit schools of France and then in a boring purgatory of common
law training at the Inns of Court (from which he repeatedly begged his
father to be released, to no avail).[^27] Talented colonial painters
such as John Singleton Copley and Benjamin West capped their careers by
moving to London. Conversely, middling British talents such as John
Smibert decamped to the colonies to be "lookt on as at the top."[^28]

In part because London collected so much intellectual activity, British
America retained the townish intellectual pattern of the earlier
republic of letters throughout the eighteenth century. In around 1750
the two largest British American cities---Boston and Philadelphia---had
populations respectively of approximately 16,000 and 13,000.[^29] Most
of the first colleges founded in British America---Harvard (1636),
William and Mary (1693), Yale (1701), and the College of New Jersey
(1746)---sprouted in such comparatively small towns as to make the idea
of rustication seem redundant. British Caribbean planters, lacking
almost any educational infrastructure at all, sent children to Britain
for education in far larger numbers than did planters from the British
American mainland colonies.[^30]

Small as early British American cities were, however, they mirrored the
pattern of the larger republic of letters by attracting learned
societies. Although the importance of "rural Enlightenment" (to use John
Fea's term) should not be minimized, learned institutions (as opposed to
more informal practices) tended to be features of British American
cities rather than plantations or villages.[^31] London had its Royal
Society, but Boston could boast an imitation as the sincerest form of
flattery: the Philosophical Society founded by Increase Mather and
others in 1683. From a similar impulse emerged Philadelphia's American
Philosophical Society (f. 1743), and Boston's American Academy of Arts
and Sciences (f. 1780).

## Letter Networks

Many ligaments tied together the global republic of letters---books,
artifacts, travelers---but none were more important than letters. Left
to us in the hundreds of thousands, these letters show the boisterous
interchange of scholarly ideas at their most personal. More than any
other scholarly practice, letters helped to link the republic of letters
into a self-conscious community of like-minded people. Although it is
difficult to generalize over such a long period as 1400-1800, the trend
of letters is steadily upward. By the eighteenth century some of the
giants in the republic of letters such as Voltaire and Thomas Jefferson
had correspondence totals (letters sent and received) easily numbering
over 10,000.

{{% notation title="Methods and Categories" %}}

One of the pre-publication manuscript readers was skeptical about an
earlier version of this paragraph, which went into much more detail
about our methods and how laborious and fruitless many of them were. In
the end, we kept the slimmed-down version of the original paragraph that
eliminated the "we are complaining about our labors" aspect.

That skeptical reader raised a good point: when you are pursuing a new
methodology (like DH was in 2012), how much do you really need to bring
the reader into your workshop to see the lumber, sweat, and sawdust? You
the researcher have labored over every last detail and methodological
problem. But how much does the reader really need to know? I think these
are useful questions to keep in mind for the field going forward.

That said, what I was trying to do is to show that the attempt at
digitization forces us to examine our categories: what in fact is a
"letter," for example? Something with a dialogic, interiority-examining
quality to it? Or can it be a receipt mailed to someone? This decision
proved crucial for the Franklin project, since his network got a fair
bit smaller when some kinds of "letters" were removed from
consideration.

My topic sentence is also a problem: Franklin did not use the word
"network" to describe his social connections, still less did he speak of
a "letter network." He did not seem to have any kind of web or cloth
metaphor in mind to describe his total correspondence, although he did
complain by the time he was in his sixties about having to write so many
letters. (Our analysis of his London correspondence showed that his
total letter volume increased enormously in the 1760s, so he had
objective reason to complain.) And yet the idea of Franklin having a
letter network was really fruitful for thinking about what the American
Enlightenment was (if indeed it was something), and where it was. To me
this raises important questions about categories of analysis. Should we
use only actors' categories? What are the benefits of bringing modern
concepts to bear on past actors, even if they themselves would never
have been able to imagine such categories?

{{% /notation %}}

Analyzing these letter networks is a nightmare. Many letters have been
lost; some are known to us only through references in other letters or
documents; still others, squirreled away in archives, elude inclusion in
major published collections. Digitization demands precision where
fuzziness reigns: who is the "author" of a letter, if in fact a group
wrote the letter (as in the case of the American delegation in Paris
negotiating treaties with France during the American Revolution)? Who is
the "recipient" if a whole bundle of letters intended for different
people was stuffed into one packet, as so often was the case? What is
more important: the geographical location of the letter writer and
recipient (by which we can gauge a network's geographical spread), or
the identities of the writer and recipient (by which we can try to
measure a person's role in a particular letter network)? This last
question can be put even more succinctly. What matters more: that many
Americans wrote to Europe during the late eighteenth century, or that
many of those in Europe to whom they wrote were other Americans?
Questions like these can become almost paralyzing during attempts at
digitization. We know in our hearts as historians that somehow we are
doing violence to our data by forcing it into these rigid categories.
Yet it is by analyzing these newly digitized correspondence networks,
with all their problems, that we can begin to take the full measure of
learned links between the Americas and the rest of the republic of
letters.

{{% notation title="How Many Letters Did Franklin Send and Receive" %}}

Honestly, we'll never know. He sent and received around 3,500 letters
during his London decades, from a lifetime total of probably around
20,000. We got this question a lot, by the way.

This raises the question of actual versus relative numbers in humanistic
data sets. Do we really care if it's 20,000 or 20,001? Or is it more
important that in the previous century a big
letter-writer/letter-receiver had only about 5,000 letters?

I learned when I presented these unknowns to the general public that
they were quite fascinated---indeed relieved---to hear about all the
ways Franklin's letters were lost: that is, why we don't have a complete
dataset, and why we never will. Some letters were burned by the British
during the Revolution, others lie at the bottom of the Atlantic. I
learned something valuable from this exchange: that people are
fascinated by all the things we don't know in history, and why we don't
know them. They'd been forced to memorize things, and now they were
learning that "history" was something quite a bit more intriguing than
memorization. All of this paradoxically emerging from a project that
rested on precision.

DH certainly makes us aware of the extent of these source gaps as never
before: the desire for numerical precision highlights our failures to
achieve it. This was already a feature of the Enlightenment. Their
obsession with numbered lists (a quality shared by both the Declaration
of Independence and the US Constitution) was a way to bring the unseen
into the light. Franklin, that is, was already creating the very world
that we are still living in today.

{{% /notation %}}

Benjamin Franklin (1706-1790) is a good example of someone with a
massive letter network. Franklin probably sent and received somewhere on
the order of 15,000 letters during his lifetime; most of these are now
accessible to anyone online, thanks to the Packard Humanities
Institute's open-access version of the Benjamin Franklin papers at Yale
University.[^32] The sheer volume of Franklin's network puts him in the
big leagues with Voltaire, although accurately counting either of their
total letters remains unexpectedly difficult. Thanks in part to the
geographic range of his network---which in terms of outgoing
correspondence forms in its broadest outlines a triangle stretching
between Philadelphia, Paris, and London---Franklin is considered perhaps
the most worldly of colonial Americans. In Gordon Wood's words, Franklin
"was undoubtedly the most cosmopolitan" of the American
revolutionaries.[^33] Franklin spent much of the last third of his life
in Britain and France at a time when some other of the most influential
thinkers of eighteenth-century America (such as James Madison) never
left North America. Europeans thought a little more modestly about
Franklin: he was not the king of the republic of letters (that was
Voltaire) but certainly an "illustrious member," according to a German
correspondent (writing to Franklin in Latin).[^34]

Franklin's letter network shows that he was not just a producer of
knowledge, the lone genius capturing lightning from the heavens: he was
also a clearinghouse of knowledge, a human switchboard. Franklin
connected other people, facilitating information exchange through the
republic of letters. He was also in the right place at the right time.
During his years in Paris laboring for the American cause, Franklin
charmed those great arbiters of success in the republic of letters, the
French. Franklin had a knack for writing reasonably lucidly in French to
French people, a skill that for a long time eluded the reliably gauche
John Adams, stationed in Paris at the same time. He honed his French at
the fortuitous moment in the evolution of the republic of letters when
French was displacing Latin as the international language of learned
communication and international diplomacy. Franklin commented on the
Latin-to-French shift in a letter to Noah Webster, hoping that English
would be the next *lingua franca*[^35]

{{% notation title="How Do We Know When Something Is New" %}}

The section below talks about whether Franklin as a "cosmopolitan"
American really represented something new, and if so, how it was new. In
this case, it seems that the digitization of large humanistic data sets
helps us to better pinpoint what is truly new: Franklin's enormous and
variegated international letter network really is new both
quantitatively and qualitatively for British North Americans.

This project also made us wonder what the term "cosmopolitan" really
means, and if you can use "hard data" rather than just your own
historical intuition to weigh in. Many people at this time were writing
about various early modern historical actors as being "cosmopolitan,"
but we felt that the term was being used quite loosely, and generally to
mean a quality that the historian admired. (The implied opposite of
"cosmopolitan" is usually an undesirable quality, like parochial or
naive.) So we decided we wanted to test it "objectively": that is, with
data rather than normative statements. We thought we could do this by
comparing the size and shape of Franklin's letter network with that of
others in the MRofL project, chiefly Voltaire and Locke. The Voltaire
comparison proved most fruitful, which is why the geomap appeared in
this article and the book, *American Enlightenments*.

{{% /notation %}}

Enmeshed in his rich web of learned political and scholarly
correspondents in Europe and British America, Franklin seems to
represent the arrival of something quite new for provincial America but
for some time well known to the rest of the republic of letters: the
philosopher-statesman, someone like Edmund Burke or Anne-Robert-Jacques
Turgot, men who combined a major political role with substantive,
internationally influential reflection on a variety of learned matters.

But was Franklin the "cosmopolitan" American really so new? How might we
compare Franklin's correspondence network to that of other British
Americans, perhaps equally but just differently members of the larger
republic of letters?

Walter Woodward's richly detailed new book about John Winthrop, Jr.,
*Prospero's America*, succinctly answers some of these questions
and in the process provides us with one of the most illuminating recent
examinations of early British America's place in the broader republic
of letters. The son of the better-remembered founder of the
Massachusetts Bay Colony, John Winthrop, Jr. (1606-1676) was born in
England exactly a century before Franklin. He became governor of
Connecticut as well as a leading alchemist at a time when alchemy loomed
as the scientific-religious key to unlocking the mineral wealth of the
New World. Woodward shows that Winthrop established a correspondence
network within what Woodward calls a "republic of alchemy."[^36] In
approximately 5,000 letters written and received in his lifetime,
Winthrop participated in a network that extended to England, the
Continent (where Winthrop traveled, forging learned connections with
scholars in alchemical centers like Hamburg), the Caribbean, and even to
the Middle East, where Winthrop met the scholar of Arabic texts, Jacob
Golius.[^37] At this time, Latin was still the international language of
the republic of letters. To be read on the Continent, even such
luminaries as the chemist Robert Boyle had to have their vernacular
English works translated into Latin.[^38]

Woodward shows that Winthrop the polyglot thrived in this complicated
world because his interests and skills were so varied: he was a kind of
Jack of all trades in the republic of letters. He read and wrote Latin,
Greek, French, and Dutch with ease. He corresponded---often in
Latin---with learned Europeans, and annotated some of his roughly 1,000
books in Latin.[^39] He was a skilled politician, maneuvering between
the learned world of alchemy and the rough and tumble of early
Connecticut politics, then enrolled in fractious imperial disputes.

Placing Winthrop in this complicated political and intellectual context
is the real payoff in Woodward's book for our understanding of the
republic of letters as a community that straddled the realms of abstract
intellectual inquiries and urgent political necessities. Winthrop became
the first colonial member of the Royal Society at a time when it formed
what Woodward calls an "interlocking directorate" with Whitehall, part
of Charles II's colonial-consolidation campaign that also included the
new Navigation Acts of 1660 and the founding of the Board of Trade and
the Council for Plantations.[^40] "Alchemical culture," Woodward writes,
"...provided a lingua franca and a worldview that united intellectuals
across Europe and across the Atlantic."[^41] Here indeed was an American
philosopher-statesman, a Franklin *avant ses lettres*.

{{% notation title="Future Letter Projects on North America" %}}

This paragraph was a call for more DH projects on the letters of 17^th^-
through 19^th^-century North Americans. Only when we have a better
understanding of the size, geographical range, and specific content of
other letter networks can we really reap the rewards of the Franklin
project. It's also a call for the digitization of more letters that are
now buried in archives. Many archives have now made parts of their
collections available with images of hand-written letters, and this is
truly wonderful. The next step---expensive and time-consuming, to be
sure---is to convert those into searchable text. I truly believe that
some of our cherished mythologies will be revised or overturned by
studies of these letter networks in their totality.

{{% /notation %}}

In this longer, richer context of British-American participation in the
larger republic of letters that Woodward gives to us, Benjamin Franklin
does not stand out as a new, glittering species of American, the lowly
provincial rocketed into the international arena of European
intellectual and political life. Rather, Franklin takes his place in a
long sequence of British American engagements in the republic of
letters. What makes Franklin new for America is rather the massive scale
of his letter network, its languages, and the role he played in his
network. The cases of Winthrop and Franklin show that the more we can
discover about these correspondence networks and how they functioned
over time and place the more we can begin to take the real measure of
the role that letters and letter-writers played in the republic of
letters.

## Centers and Peripheries

If London was a capital of the republic of letters, were the British
American colonies peripheries? The question can be put more generally:
in what ways were intellectual centers central, and in what ways were
intellectual peripheries peripheral? Network mapping can begin to answer
some of these questions by visually representing basic quantitative
information about the republic of letters, such as where most books were
published, who wrote letters to whom, and who possessed which scientific
instruments, plants, and artifacts.

{{% notation title="The United Airlines Problem" %}}

These kinds of cartographic visualizations create what I call the
"United Airlines problem" (others have their own names for it): they
make letters appear to be flying in tidy lines or arcs when in fact
18^th^-century ships, roads, foot messengers, and canals would have
carried them in in idiosyncratic and nonlinear routes. A lot of terrific
new work has been done since this article was published to rectify this
problem.

{{% /notation %}}

But cartographic mapping (that is, placing networks onto a map of the
Earth) creates its own illusions and distortions when it comes to
centers and peripheries, so we have to be careful. This is especially so
for mapping the place of British America---or anywhere physically remote
from Europe---in the republic of letters. In a nutshell, this is the
problem: because the Atlantic Ocean is so big, placing letter networks
onto a cartographic map immediately makes the far-away Americas look
more peripheral or exotic or "cosmopolitan" than other peripheries of
the republic of letters that are closer to (or even in) Europe, such as
Constantinople or Stockholm.

{{% notation title="Comparisons" %}}

There was much good-natured *faux* rivalry in MRofL, each of us
plumping for our own historical figure. The visualization below is one
example, in which we compared Franklin with Voltaire, the research
subject of my colleague Dan Edelstein, in order to see who "won" the
cosmopolitanism contest. The serious outcome of these playful contests,
however, was a consideration of the ways in which geographic realities
actually mattered to the history of ideas. It was another huge spur to
the eventual conceptualization and publication of *American
Enlightenments*, and as mentioned before the image below appears on
page 29 of the book.

{{% /notation %}}

In our project we have experienced this as the Franklin-Voltaire
problem. Placed onto a map, Franklin's letter network (top, in blue)
looks strikingly different from Voltaire's (bottom, in red) simply
because many of Franklin's letters crossed the Atlantic, while only a
few of Voltaire's did (though we recognize that a number of letters have
been lost).

{{< figure src="/img/Winterer_image1.png" alt="2 maps of the Atlantic, one showing Franklin's cross Atlantic network and one showing Voltaire's network mostly contained to Europe." >}}

Depending on how we interpret the maps, we can call Franklin either more
peripheral than Voltaire to the republic of letters (since much of his
activity emerged from the colonial periphery), or more worldly than
Voltaire (since his network reached across the Atlantic). By emphasizing
geography, cartographic representations of intellectual networks also
conceal the ways in which provinces physically closer to Paris and
London might be more peripheral or distant than British America in
non-geographical ways, say in their language, institutional
infrastructure, or religion. To correct for these geographical
illusions, our project is working on developing non-geographical visual
representations. So-called network graphs, for example, represent
intellectual relationships in non-cartographic ways, pushing people
further or closer depending on how many letters they exchanged.[^42]

{{% notation title="New Maybes" %}}

Staying on the theme of motion, one benefit of DH projects is that they
can help to uncover new "maybes." My colleague Giovanna Ceserani's
project on Grand Tour travelers has traced with new precision the
itineraries and therefore the possibly unrecorded meetings of
18^th^-century people. Two people traveling through Florence on the same
day in 1787 might have bumped into each other and had a fruitful
conversation, even if they never discussed it in their letters or
publications. So just as DH presents us with a discouragingly large new
series of unknowns (all those dates for Franklin's letters) it also
supplies us with an intriguing new array of "might-have-beens." See
Giovanna Ceserani et al., "British Travelers in Eighteenth-Century
Italy: The Grand Tour and the Profession of Architecture," *American Historical Review* 122, 2 (April 2017): 425-50.

{{% /notation %}}

The problem of centers and peripheries has long preoccupied historians
of the American Enlightenment, who struggle to reconcile British
America's arguably peripheral presence to the European Enlightenment
while still explaining dazzling eruptions such as the Declaration of
Independence and U.S. Constitution.[^43] Some of the most vocal recent
participation in this debate has come from historians of Enlightenment
science, who have rejected center-periphery models as static and rigid,
highlighting instead interconnected and contingent pathways of
interaction, both between and across institutions and empires. They have
drawn our attention away from celebrated scientists and intellectuals at
the imperial center to the actors at the periphery: sea captains,
sailors, surgeon-barbers, Africans, Native Americans, Creoles, and
others who helped to create new knowledge that often went unacknowledged
in published scientific works of the time.[^44]

Neil Safier's *Measuring the New World* is a recent example of a
work in this vein. Although it concerns Spanish America rather than
British America, it is useful to consider in more depth because of its
methodology and assumptions about how to study intellectual activity in
imperial centers and colonial peripheries.[^45] Safier's book charts
the attempt by eighteenth-century European scientists to measure the
curvature of the earth, a project undertaken largely in equatorial South
America, most famously by the French scientist Charles-Marie de La
Condamine. Knowledge gathered in Spanish America was then shipped back
to Europe, where it was reshaped by French editors and scholars for
broader public consumption in encyclopedias, histories, and edited
collections. Safier carefully and lucidly charts various episodes in
this scientific quest---the creation of maps, the collecting of data,
the editing of texts---with the larger goal of debunking the idea that
Enlightenment science was a fortress of objectivity built by the
single-handed brilliance of eminent European scientists. "By recovering
what was invisible in the final versions of European accounts," he
writes, "we recognize Enlightenment science in an age of imperial
expansion for what it was: not an omniscient, universal knowledge of the
natural world but rather a partial and contingent knowledge, one that
silenced and suppressed its sources just as often as it acknowledged and
represented them."[^46] He elaborates in great detail the process by
which La Condamine and other Enlightenment figures "suppressed" and
"erased" the contributions of others in their accounts.[^47]

Safier's book raises two important methodological questions about how
historians should interpret the information exchange between colonial
periphery and imperial center. The first is how to establish intent:
when actors in the metropole received information from the periphery,
what did they hope to do with it? How do we interpret the results of
their efforts in retrospect, now that we know the cumulative damage of
imperialism? Safier is wont to see sinister intent, what he calls
"strategic effacement" and "insidious effacement" of "local sources" in
French Enlightenment compilations of knowledge imported from South
America.[^48] His analysis of the criticisms that eighteenth-century
French editors leveled at the 1609 history of the Incas published by
Garcilaso de le Vega (El Inca) suggests that these show metropolitans
looking askance at native New World inferiorities. French editors
charged that Garcilaso had merely heaped up facts in a disorderly way,
so that readers struggled to follow a clear historical narrative.[^49]
The new French edition of 1744 made a number of changes to Garcilaso's
text, which Safier meticulously charts. But did these alterations really
point to sinister metropolitan suppressions, as Safier seems to suggest?
In altering Garcilaso's earlier text, writes Safier, French editors
"dismissed entirely a logic that conceivably derived from more local
sources."[^50] But accusations that earlier books were jumbled and
outdated mountains of facts were not unique to metropolitans critiquing
the indigene. This was the ubiquitous language of marketing a new
edition of a book; even the most esteemed subjects beloved of
metropolitan nabobs came under attack. Victorian scholars tarred the
Frenchman Charles Rollin's internationally best-selling classical
history, the *Histoire Ancienne* (1730-1738), with basically the
same brush, calling it an "omnivorous farrago."[^51]

The second question raised by Safier's book is how to determine when
peripheries have absorbed enough practices of the republic of letters
that while physically remote they have become intellectually quite
close. Safier calls many of his South American sources "indigenous or
local informants."[^52] But by the eighteenth century the Spanish
influence in the Andes had been felt for more than two centuries, making
the idea of a pure New World "local" or "indigenous" source problematic
for all but the most isolated individuals.

A subtler assessment of the intellectual syncretism that emerged in the
Spanish American fringe of the republic of letters appears in Sabine
MacCormack's *On the Wings of Time*.[^53] MacCormack portrays
Garcilaso de la Vega as an example of the Inca-Spanish cultural
syncretism already effected even by 1609. Far from being a
representative of a pure Inca local source, Garcilaso emerges in
MacCormack's account as representative of the new, synthetic
post-conquest society called Peru. Even though Garcilaso mourned the
passing of the Inca empire, it was the new society of Peru---with both
its Spanish and Inca elements---that gave him the intellectual tools to
fully imagine an Inca history and to sew it into a larger world history
that could be published and then read by the greater republic of
letters. Garcilaso's text had unpredictable outcomes, prompting not just
French editors' new 1744 edition but helping to inspire a Peruvian
uprising in 1780: the modernized text, that is, became a tool of both
metropole and periphery.[^54] The integration of Greco-Roman historical
practices into the Andean world by writers such as Garcilaso, agues
MacCormack, was not just an intellectual imposition from the metropole
but a way to incorporate the peoples of the Andes and their history into
the larger stream of world history. \"To compare the Incas and the
Romans, to explain events in Peru in light of Roman precedent, and to
use examples of Greek and Roman historiography in order to pinpoint the
meaning of events was to incorporate Andean experience into human
experience across space and time," she writes. "Those who criticize
these writings for imposing \-- as they perceive it \-- alien norms on
Andean subject matter should consider the alternative: that the Andean
world would remain forever separated and secluded from the rest of
humanity.\"[^55]

## Religion

British America differed from much of the republic of letters in still
another important way: the comparatively minor presence of Catholicism
generally and the Jesuits specifically as conduits of intellectual
activity. The Society of Jesus, from its foundation in 1540 to its
dissolution in 1773, functioned as the chief global intellectual arm of
the early modern Catholic Church. By 1600, its network of educational
institutions and erudite priests had spread Catholic theology and
European learning to Asia and the New World. Communiqués transmitted
back to Europe by the Jesuits and other Catholic orders greatly
increased the knowledge available about the world and its peoples.[^56]
The Spanish missionary José de Acosta (1539-1600) spent fifteen years in
Spanish America and published one of the first books about the New World
Indians in 1590. The Italian priest Matteo Ricci (1552-1610) spent a
quarter century in China and linked European and Chinese intellectual
developments. The extravagantly erudite German scholar Athanasius
Kircher (1602-1680) published over forty books on everything from China
to volcanoes to contagion to Egyptian hieroglyphics; his correspondence
network reached across the globe to New Spain and China. No less
important were the intellectual networks forged within Europe by Jesuits
with other learned Europeans. These ties formed major links in the
republic at a time when no one drew lines between religious and secular
knowledge.[^57]

Contrast this with British America, where the Jesuits played a much
smaller role. On the eve of American independence, Catholics (often
termed papists, a term that sums up the threat they represented) made up
only one percent of the population in the thirteen colonies, and they
were subjected to the most severe legal disabilities.[^58] Rumors of
papist plots trickled through the British American press amid mounting
fears of an imperializing Louis XIV and Catholicizing Stuarts.[^59] Even
in the most Catholicized regions of British America on the eve of the
Revolution---the colony of Maryland, founded by the Catholic Lord
Baltimore, and the relatively tolerant city of Philadelphia---there were
only about 20,000 to 25,000 Catholics in a total mainland British
American population of about 2.3 million.[^60] In Maryland there were
never more than five Jesuit priests at any one time during the
seventeenth century.[^61] The small school the Jesuits had launched at
Newtown in the middle of the seventeenth century closed after the
1688-89 Glorious Revolution that had displaced Catholic James II for
Protestant William and Mary. Elite Catholic families in
eighteenth-century Maryland such as the Carrolls sent their sons to
Jesuit schools on the Continent.[^62]

Placing early British America in the larger context of the religious
republic of letters, in fact, suggests that by comparison with the great
Catholic imperial powers of Spain, France, and Portugal, religion in any
form played an insignificant part in Protestant Britain's early imperial
expansion around the globe. Even the Puritans in the New England
colonies made comparatively few efforts to convert the Indians.
"Compared to the Iberian experience," writes Luca Codignola, "and even
to the more modest French success, whereby New France was virtually kept
alive as a colony until the 1650s by the church itself, the practical
influence of religion on early English expansion was small and marginal,
and Protestant efforts achieved little."[^63]

Alison Games's deeply researched *The Web of Empire*---about the many
fragile early English forays into a new world of global trade in the
years 1560-1660---greatly expands our current knowledge about the
activities of religious figures in England's nascent empire. With its
global canvas, the book will enable new conversations and comparisons
between early Americanists and their early modern European colleagues.
Games argues that England was so weak early on that its
emissaries---mostly merchants but also chaplains, scholars, ambassadors,
and soldiers---purposely cultivated a way of dealing with the world that
she calls "cosmopolitanism." This she defines as people's ability "to
encounter those unlike themselves with enthusiasm and curiosity" and to
"critique their own nation and customs."[^64] Cosmopolitanism was a
learned behavior, she argues, "a posture derived from weakness, and
central to English expansion when the kingdom itself was weak."[^65]

Although Games treats religion throughout the book, the most systematic
appraisal appears in the chapter entitled "The Cosmopolitan Clergy,
1620-1660." English trading outfits such as the Levant Company and East
India Company dispatched cadres of learned Protestant ministers to Asian
and Mediterranean posts in large part to counter the perceived Jesuit
threat. The English "feared the Jesuits above all other religious
orders," Games observes, a fear tempered by Protestants' real respect
for Jesuit erudition, especially their skills in disputation.[^66] The
English sent their best men, a group Games calls "scholar-chaplains."
Most of the English chaplains stationed at Istanbul and Smyrna had
attended Cambridge University, just as seventy-one percent of the
ministers in New England in the 1620s and 1630s were Cambridge men.[^67]
But their Protestant numbers were small by comparison to the armies of
Jesuits fanning across the globe: approximately 920 Jesuits participated
in the China missions between the sixteenth century and 1800.[^68]

What is striking about Games's methodology is that she treats these
Protestants first as part of a globalizing imperial project and second
as men of the cloth, thereby reversing the usual cart and horse of early
American history. Intellectual historians of early America have often
put the religious motivations of New England's earliest English
settlers first and worked out from there. To take the classic case of
Perry Miller, the fact that a New England mind hummed along in a
specific place called New England remained first a theological problem
("the wilderness") and only second an imperial problem. Miller's
geographies often make more sense as metaphors for intellectual activity
than as actual places on a map.[^69] Miller's main business was ideas,
the hunger for meaning in a hollow world, what he memorably called the
marrow of Puritan divinity. He justified his narrow geographical focus
on the New England colonies by arguing that they provided "a laboratory"
of "controlled conditions" to see how "the whole" of thought played out
in the part. For Miller, the local became the global, the part became
the whole, and New England exemplified "the essential characteristics"
of "the most important problems of the era."[^70]

By contrast with Perry Miller, Games starts with the global and then
goes local. Subsuming the religious category of theology to the imperial
category of cosmopolitanism, she points out that the English clergy were
so fragmented before 1660 that no single religious vision (let alone a
grimly Calvinist New England mind) dominated anywhere in England's early
attempts at empire-building. Games defines her chaplains less as
religiously motivated types than as men who forged a particular brand of
cosmopolitanism: "ecumenism, the clerical variation on the merchant's
cosmopolitanism."[^71] Famously intolerant of the religions of others
around the globe (including the American Indians), these cosmopolitan
English clerics nonetheless reached out to the world in other,
non-religious ways, pursuing economic opportunities, governing local
laborers, and trying out new social formations.[^72]

Readers will say: this hardly sounds like the New England Puritans, who
were not especially known for encountering those unlike themselves with
enthusiasm and curiosity. But Games has a place for them as well: among
the non-cosmopolitan. She shows that Oliver Cromwell purposely sought
intolerant, orthodox New Englanders to colonize Ireland, believing them
skilled at forming independent, lay-governed congregations and at
quelling internal dissent. "Cromwell sought experienced colonists---but
not cosmopolitans," she writes. "These were, instead, men who preferred
stark separations in their worlds, between Christian and heathen,
English and Irish, circumspect and profligate, saved (they hoped) and
damned. Unlike other travelers, these transplanted puritans from
southern New England were not men eager to appreciate the diversity of
humanity." Far from finding in the New England Puritans the seeds of
American democracy or anything else so illustrious, she sees them as the
obsolescing practitioners of a kind of religious settlement "that was in
the process of becoming the most marginalized." [^73]

The subtitle of Games's book is "English Cosmopolitanism in an Age of
Expansion, 1560-1660," and among her many achievements is to challenge
historians to think about how to use cosmopolitanism as an analytic
tool. What was it? What was it *not*? When was it? Games ventures
some answers to these questions. First, she shows how "cosmopolitanism"
can expand our vision of early modern history and early America's place
in that narrative. In the specific case of religion, what is gained with
her cosmopolitan framework is a glimpse of the Puritans within a larger
imperial context: they were not the marquee attraction in the period
1560-1660, but rather bit players in England's emerging global,
mercantile empire. Some might quibble that defining Puritans as "not
cosmopolitans" diminishes the other ways in which they arguably were
cosmopolitans: their many scholarly links to the Continent, their
libraries stacked with polyglot texts, their relentless effort to
commune with the minds of the early Church. Here is where scholars of
the early modern European republic of letters can usefully contribute
their own findings.[^74] Second, Games offers a time frame for
cosmopolitanism, suggesting that it was confined to Britain's early
years of empire-building and that over time it was replaced by "racist
ideas that called for rigid hierarchies, displacement, separation, and
exclusion."[^75] Other scholars see cosmopolitanism thriving today, as
the outpouring of works on cosmopolitanism since the 1990s
suggests.[^76] Kwame Anthony Appiah defines *cosmopolitanism* as
the twin ideas "that we have obligations to others" and "that we take
seriously the value not just of human life but of particular human
lives," however different they may be from our own.[^77] He too has his
non-cosmopolitans ("counter-cosmopolitans"): like Games's New England
Puritans, they are religious figures, the "neofundamentalists" who
embody "universalism without toleration."[^78] By placing
cosmopolitanism far back in time, Games's book can bring these debates
about definition and duration to an audience of historians of early
America.

Transformation and Causality in the Republic of Letters

When did the republic of letters end, and why? These are not usually
questions American historians ask. For us, the big event of the late
eighteenth century is the American Revolution, which banished monarchy
and aristocracy and ushered in the modern world's first successful,
long-term republic. The American Revolution had major consequences for
American intellectual life, which have been probed in detail. These
consequences included the proliferation of books, magazines, and
newspapers published under U.S. imprints in the post-revolutionary era
and the self-conscious effort to drum up an "American" nationalist or at
least republican sentiment. Everywhere Americans established or nurtured
colleges and female academies dedicated to schooling republican
citizens. Existing colleges re-christened themselves with republican
names: King's College became Columbia, Queen's College became Rutgers.
Independence from Britain opened new opportunities for hundreds of
intellectually ambitious Americans to travel to European universities,
museums, churches, and ruins. The new United States witnessed a
proliferation of institutions such as museums, clubs, and historical
societies dedicated to preserving, promoting, and displaying "American"
material and print artifacts, where America was defined as "leading to
the United States."

Catherine O'Donnell Kaplan's *Men of Letters in the Early Republic*
probes the implications of the demanding political conviction of
republicanism for early national American intellectuals.[^79] She
focuses on the neglected but important early national period
(1790-1820), which was like the Cretaceous just before the great
meteorite that wiped out the dinosaurs. Old-style polymaths such as
Benjamin Rush and Thomas Jefferson hardly knew what hit them as
generalism gave way to specialization and knowledge expanded far beyond
the ability of any living person to master. Never again would an
American presidential election pit---as it did in 1800---a president of
the American Philosophical Society (Jefferson) against a president of
the American Academy of Arts and Sciences (Adams). After the shock of
revolution came an unexpected new era of viscerally fought party
politics. But among the fading Jefferson-style polymaths flourished a
vigorous new species: the first professional men of letters in America,
who earned their living with their pens, editing journals, founding
clubs, publishing novels.

Kaplan traces the quixotic efforts of a group of early national American
men (and a few women) of letters to amputate their own intellectual
aspirations from what they perceived to be the metastasizing inanities
of the new party politics. Kaplan calls these men and women "cultural
strivers" who "believed they had something to offer to Europe as well as
much to learn from it."[^80] The striver in chief was Elihu Hubbard
Smith, energetic member of the Friendly Club in New York, but there were
many others who yearned---as Kaplan nicely puts it---to "escape from the
new tyranny of one's endless political relevance and
responsibility."[^81] Kaplan, who is as much a literary scholar as a
historian, is at her best capturing with nuance and sophistication the
intellectual style of her group of self-described men and women of
letters, which was alternately self-glorifying and self-pitying.

Yet she might have probed more forcefully the transatlantic implications
of her subject. She is aware of the republic of letters beyond the
United States but not particularly inclined to explore American
connections to that world. Kaplan states that her men of letters saw
themselves not only as U.S. citizens but as citizens of the "larger
republic of letters."[^82] She shows how their panting Anglophilia
endured well beyond the revolutionary era and that American men of
letters "rejected the idea of 'Americanness' as a meaningful
trait."[^83] There are excellent paragraphs on the particular threat of
the French Revolution and the challenge of Haiti; the English
philosopher Edmund Burke and the French revolutionary Volney make a few
appearances. Yet the larger intellectual world---not just of people but
especially of ideas---that made her men of letters objectively
republican (as opposed to, say, monarchical) tends to fade from view.

This is important because finally we are left with the question of
whether and how politics figures in the republic of letters. The U.S.
was among the first great examples of what we might call sustainable
republicanism in the republic of letters. It was a perfect test case for
how intellectual life proceeds when freed from monarchical suppressions
(or, depending on your perspective, how intellectual life proceeds when
deprived of generous monarchical patronage). Kaplan poignantly reminds
us that her group of American men of letters has been entirely
forgotten, except by academic specialists, and she is to be commended
for resurrecting them sympathetically here, with all their hand-wringing
and nay-saying about American politics. But we are left with the strange
conundrum that the man who gave us the most acute and memorable
diagnosis of what democracy in America meant for the life of the mind
was not an early national man of letters but a French aristocrat living
in a monarchy: Alexis de Tocqueville.

In fact, seen in the broader context of the republic of letters, the
specific influences of the American Revolution and republicanism on the
deep structures of U.S. intellectual life become more difficult to
assert with confidence. These changes include the decline of the
polymath as an intellectual ideal; the increasing specialization of
intellectual functions and deeper, more methodologically self-conscious
research into more precise questions; the collapse of an international
language of scholarship (Latin) and the rise of multiple vernaculars;
the rising number of colleges and universities and their absorption of
intellectual functions that had previously been more widely distributed
throughout the republic of letters, such as research, learned libraries,
and collecting; the institutional democratization of intellectual life
in the form of female and workingmen's academies; the proliferation of
learned degrees and their increasing use in the certification and
promotion of scholars and scholarship; and the gradual shift in
scholarly patronage from the early modern aristocracy to
nineteenth-century industrial plutocrats and finally to the modern era's
government agencies.

{{% notation title="Nationalism" %}}

This paragraph considers the flip side of the question raised earlier in
the essay, about how we might use digital tools to refine our definition
and understanding of cosmopolitanism. Can we use digital tools to
measure nationalism?

{{% /notation %}}

All around Europe and the Americas in the decades after 1800, the
pre-national intellectual world of the republic of letters gave way to
the international intellectual world of increasingly powerful,
nationally based institutions, patronage, and reward structures. For
Americans the possibilities for intensive engagement with non-English
intellectual centers actually increased during the nineteenth century as
London's relative importance dwindled. American missionaries, humanists
and scientists fanned out into the Pacific, South America, and the
Middle East, publishing "American" works about these areas and in some
cases establishing a scholarly institutional presence there. The most
influential new center by the late nineteenth century was of course
Germany, whose academic traditions spurred a wholesale transformation of
American educational and scholarly ideals. Gradually the United States
itself moved from the periphery of the republic of letters to become a
major intellectual center in its own right in the twentieth century.

Did all these changes mark the end of the republic of letters? The
answer depends on who you ask. For historians of early modern Europe,
the cut-off for the republic of letters is usually the French
Revolution. Americans historians whose expertise lies in the late
nineteenth and early twentieth centuries have made a case that some form
of the republic of letters was still alive and well and living in the
Gilded Age and Progressive eras.[^84] Their works have shown that
features of the older republic of letters remain: a shared culture of
honor and reputation; a desire to reach a broad audience and not just a
narrow slice of professionals. As scholars we often still feel part of a
global republic of letters, though one of course radically changed from
the early modern era.

In the end, we are left with the basic questions of definition and
causality that define every historical inquiry. What in fact was the
republic of letters, both to people in the past who felt part of this
ephemeral world, and to us, now able with new tools to probe a lost
world with greater specificity than ever before? This article cannot of
course answer these questions, but simply ask them for a new generation
of historians embarking on a vastly changed archival landscape.

[^1]: *Acknowledgments*: Thanks to Charles Capper, Michael O'Brien,
    Mark Peterson, and James Turner for their incisive comments on
    earlier versions of this article. I am also grateful to my
    colleagues on the Mapping the Republic of Letters project at
    Stanford for many productive conversations: Giovanna Ceserani,
    Nicole Coleman, Dan Edelstein, and Paula Findlen. My graduate
    students Julia Mansfield, Claire Rydell, and Scott Spillman have
    also worked tremendously hard on the project, and I remain very
    appreciative of their labors. Thanks to Giorgio Caviglia of
    DensityDesign Research Lab in Milano, Italy, for producing the maps
    of Franklin and Voltaire's correspondence.

    The term "British America" is problematic since it seems to
    anticipate the arrival of "Americans," that is, of the United
    States, and it promises attention to Canada that I do not give here.
    The terms "colonial America" and "early America," however, do not
    distinguish enough among Britain, France, and Spain's New World
    empires. So British America it is, for lack of a better term.

[^2]: This is from the website of Cambridge University Press.

[^3]: D. Lundberg and H. F. May, "The Enlightened Reader in America,"
    *American Quarterly* 28 (1976), 262-93.

[^4]: L. W. B. Brockliss, *Calvet's Web: Enlightenment and the Republic of Letters in Eighteenth-Century France* (New York, 2002),
    vii-viii.

[^5]: On the use of the term *orbis litterarius*, see H. Bots and
    F. Waquet, *La République Des Lettres* (Paris, 1997), 23,
    63-90.

[^6]: On "colony," see Waquet, *La République Des Lettres*, 26.

[^7]: C. Furey, *Erasmus, Contarini, and the Religious Republic of Letters* (Cambridge, 2006); A. Shelford, *Transforming the Republic of Letters: Pierre-Daniel Huet and European Intellectual Life, 1650-1720* (Rochester, 2007).

[^8]: John Adams, entry for 16 April 1778, in L. H. Butterfield, ed.,
    *Diary and Autobiography of John Adams*. Vol. 4: *Autobiography Parts Two and Three 1777-1780* (Cambridge, MA, 1962), 62.

[^9]: Last twenty years is 1990-2010. Only English-language titles were
    sampled. For this research I am indebted to Scott Spillman, Ph.D.
    candidate, Department of History, Stanford University.

[^10]: The Electronic Enlightenment Project, University of Oxford
    [www.e-enlightenment.com](http://www.e-enlightenment.com/));
    the Cultures of Knowledge Project, University of Oxford
    [www.history.ox.ac.uk/cofk](http://www.history.ox.ac.uk/cofk);
    and the Circulation of Knowledge project in the Netherlands
    [ckcc.huygens.knaw.nl](http://www.ckcc.huygens.knaw.nl/)).
    For a useful introduction to scholarship on spatial mapping in the
    republic of letters, see Robert Mayhew, "British Geography's
    Republic of Letters: Mapping an Imagined Community, 1600-1800,"
    *Journal of the History of Ideas*, 65 (April 2004), 251-276.

[^11]: L. Brockey, *Journey to the East: The Jesuit Mission to China, 1579-1724* (Cambridge, MA, 2007; L. Brockey, ed., *Portuguese Colonial Cities in the Early Modern World*(Farnham, 2008); M.
    Ogborn, *Indian Ink: Script and Print in the Making of the English East India Company* (Chicago, 2007); and F. Hsia, *Sojourners in a Strange Land: Jesuits and Their Scientific Missions in Late Imperial China* (Chicago, 2009).

[^12]: For a recent overview of the scholarship, see A. Grafton, "A
    Sketch Map of a Lost Continent: The Republic of Letters," *Republics of Letters*, 1 (May 2009),
    [http://rofl.stanford.edu/node/34](http://rofl.stanford.edu/node/34).

[^13]: The two books are G. Ostrander, *Republic of Letters: The American Intellectual Community, 1776-1865* (Madison, 1999);
    and J. Smith, ed., *The Republic of Letters: The Correspondence Between Thomas Jefferson and James Madison, 1776-1826*, 3 vols.
    (New York, 1995). The topic has been treated in shorter formats. See
    especially the useful essay by D. Hall, "Learned Culture in the
    Eighteenth Century," in H. Amory and D. Hall, eds., *A History of the Book in America*,Vol. 1: *The Colonial Book in the Atlantic World* (New York, 2000), 411-33; N. Landsman, "A Transatlantic 'Republic of Letters,'" in Landsman, *From Colonials to Provincials: American Thought and Culture, 1680-1760* (Ithaca, 1997), 31-56;
    N. Fiering, "The Transatlantic Republic of Letters: A Note on the
    Circulation of Learned Periodicals to Early Eighteenth-Century
    America," *William and Mary Quarterly* 3d ser., 33 (Oct. 1976),
    642-60. The subject has also been treated influentially in books
    that play with the wording: M. Warner, *The Letters of the Republic: Publication and the Public Sphere in Eighteenth-Century America* (Cambridge, MA, 1990); and D. Shields, *Civil Tongues and Polite Letters in British America* (Chapel Hill, 1997).

[^14]: Thanks to Michael O'Brien for his shrewd thoughts on this matter;
    e-mail communication to author, 5 November 2010.

[^15]: See especially Amory and Hall, *Colonial Book*; T. Augst and
    J. Carpenter, eds., *Institutions of Reading: The Social Life of Libraries in the United States* (Amherst, 2007); R. Sher, *The Enlightenment and the Book: Scottish Authors and Their Publishers in Eighteenth-Century Britain, Ireland, and America* (Chicago,
    2006).

[^16]: Trevor Burnard makes the same point for imperialism more broadly
    in "The British Atlantic," in J. Greene and P. Morgan, eds.,
    *Atlantic History: A Critical Appraisal* (New York, 2009),
    111-36.

[^17]: H. Amory, "Reinventing the Colonial Book," in Amory and Hall,
    *Colonial Books*, 43.

[^18]: S. Parrish, *American Curiosity: Cultures of Natural History in the Colonial British Atlantic World* (Chapel Hill, 2006),
    128-35.

[^19]: A. O'Shaughnessy, *An Empire Divided: The American Revolution and the British Caribbean* (Philadelphia, 2001), 19-27.

[^20]: M. Peterson, *"Theopolis Americana*: The City-State of
    Boston, the Republic of Letters, and the Protestant International,
    1689-1739," in B. Bailyn and P. Denault, eds., *Soundings in Atlantic History: Latent Structures and Intellectual Currents, 1500-1830* (Cambridge, MA, 2009), 329-70.

[^21]: Nicholas Phillipson, "Culture and Society in the 18^th^ Century
    Province: The Case of Edinburgh and the Scottish Enlightenment," in
    L. Stone, ed., *The University in Society* Vol. 2: *Europe, Scotland, and the United States from the 16th to the 20th Century* (Princeton, 1974), 425.

[^22]: R. B. Davis, *Intellectual Life in the Colonial South, 1585-1763*, 3 vols. (Knoxville, 1978), 1: 363.

[^23]: For city populations see P. Clark, *European Cities and Towns: 400-2000* (Oxford, 2009), 121.

[^24]: J. Flavell, *When London Was Capital of America* (New Haven,
    2010), 4, 11, 21.

[^25]: J. Raven, *The Business of Books: Booksellers and the English Book Trade, 1450-1830* (New Haven, 2007), 9.

[^26]: Davis, *Intellectual Life*, 1: 371.

[^27]: See especially Charles Carroll of Carrollton to Charles Carroll
    of Annapolis, 10 April 1760, in R. Hoffman, ed., *Dear Papa, Dear
    Charley: The Peregrinations of a Revolutionary Aristocrat \[etc.\]*, 3 vols. (Chapel Hill, 2001), 1: 151-53.

[^28]: Quote from S. Feld, "In the Latest London Manner," *Metropolitan Museum of Art Bulletin* 21 (May 1963), 308.

[^29]: C. Bridenbaugh, *Cities in the Wilderness: The First Century of Urban Life in America , 1625-1742* (New York, 1938), 303.
    Contrast this with Spanish America, where by 1740 Mexico City had a
    population of 112,000 and Lima 52,000; see J. H. Elliott, *Empires of the Atlantic World: Britain and Spain in America, 1492-1830*
    (New Haven, 2006), 262, 204.

[^30]: O'Shaughnessy, *Empire Divided*, 19-27.

[^31]: J. Fea, *The Way of Improvement Leads Home: Philip Vickers Fithian and the Rural Enlightenment in Early America*
    (Philadelphia, 2008).

[^32]: [http://franklinpapers.org/franklin/](http://franklinpapers.org/franklin/)

[^33]: G. Wood, *The Americanization of Benjamin Franklin* (New
    York, 2004), 9.

[^34]: Johann Adolf Behrends to B. Franklin, 28 Oct. 1778, in C. Lopez,
    ed., *Papers of Benjamin Franklin* (New Haven, 1988), 27: 656.

[^35]: B. Franklin to N. Webster, Jr., 26 Dec. 1789:
    [http://franklinpapers.org/franklin/](http://franklinpapers.org/franklin/)

[^36]: W. Woodward, *Prospero's America: John Winthrop, Jr., Alchemy, and the Creation of New England Culture, 1606-1676* (Chapel
    Hill, 2010), 65.

[^37]: On the estimate of 5,000, I am grateful for the e-mail
    communication from W. Woodward, 18 August 2010, who also advises
    that a number of letters may not have survived. For locations of
    correspondents, see Woodward, *Prospero*, 3, 54, 65.

[^38]: Bots and Waquet, *La République des Lettres*, 147.

[^39]: On his languages, see M. Freiberg, ed., *Winthrop Papers, Vol. 6: 1650-1654* (Boston, MA, 1992), x. On annotations in Latin, see
    C. Browne, "Scientific Notes from the Books and Letters of John
    Winthrop, Jr. (1606-1676)," *Isis*, 11 (Dec. 1928), 325-342,
    esp. 327.

[^40]: Woodward, *Prospero*, 262, 263, 254.

[^41]: Woodward, *Prospero*, 69.

[^42]: Thanks to the Sébastien Heymann at Gephi
    [[http://gephi.org/](http://gephi.org/) for producing these
    visualizations for this project.

[^43]: H. May, *The Enlightenment in America* (New York, 1976); R.
    Ferguson, *The American Enlightenment, 1750-1820* (Cambridge,
    1994); C. Winterer, *The American Enlightenment: Treasures from the Stanford University Libraries* (Stanford, 2011).

[^44]: For recent examples see, in a growing literature, L. Schiebinger,
    *Plants and Empire: Colonial Bioprospecting in the Atlantic World* (Cambridge, MA, 2004); J. Delbourgo and N. Dew, eds.,
    *Science and Empire in the Atlantic World* (New York, 2007).

[^45]: N. Safier, *Measuring the New World: Enlightenment Science and South America* (Chicago, 2008).

[^46]: Safier, *Measuring*, 9.

[^47]: Safier, *Measuring*, 15, 25.

[^48]: Safier, *Measuring*, 199, 223.

[^49]: Safier, *Measuring*, 210.

[^50]: Safier, *Measuring*, 223.

[^51]: C. Winterer, *The Culture of Classicism: Ancient Greece and Rome in American Intellectual Life, 1780-1910* (Baltimore, 2002),
    88.

[^52]: Safier, *Measuring*, 252.

[^53]: S. MacCormack, *On the Wings of Time: Rome, the Incas, Spain, and Peru* (Princeton, 2007).

[^54]: MacCormack, *On the Wings*, 65.

[^55]: MacCormack, *On the Wings*, xvii-xviii.

[^56]: M. Feingold, "Jesuits: Savants," in M. Feingold, ed., *Jesuit Science and the Republic of Letters* (Cambridge, MA, 2003),
    1-45.

[^57]: S. Harris, "Confession-Building, Long-Distance Networks and the
    Organization of Jesuit Science," *Early Science and Medicine*,
    1 (Oct. 1996): 287-318; S. Harris, "Mapping Jesuit Science: The Role
    of Travel in the Geography of Knowledge," in J. O'Malley et al.,
    eds., *The Jesuits: Cultures, Sciences, and the Arts, 1540-1773* (Toronto, 1999), 212-40. I am indebted to my
    colleague Paula Findlen for opportunities to view maps of Kircher's
    correspondence network.

[^58]: L. Codignola, "The Holy See and the Conversion of the Indians in
    French and British North America, 1486-1750," in K. Kupperman, ed.,
    *America in European Consciousness, 1493-1750* (Chapel Hill,
    1995), 213.

[^59]: O. Stanwood, "The Protestant Moment: Antipopery, the Revolution
    of 1688--1689, and the Making of an Anglo-American Empire," *Journal of British Studies*, 46 (July 2007), 481-508, esp. 485.

[^60]: I arrived at the Catholic population figure by adding the number
    of Catholics (20,000) in Maryland in 1765 with the number on the eve
    of revolution in Philadelphia (1,200), both figures in T. Walch,
    ed., *Early American Catholicism, 1634-1820: Selected Historical Essays* (New York, 1988), unpaginated introduction, 3-4. For
    American population totals in roughly 1775, see E. Greene, V.
    Harrington et al., *American Population before the Federal Census of 1790* (New York, 1932; repr. 1981), 6-7.

[^61]: J. Dolan, *The American Catholic Experience: A History from Colonial Times to the Present* (Garden City, NY, 1985), 81.

[^62]: Dolan, *American Catholic*, 82. The first permanent Jesuit
    institution of higher learning in the United States was Georgetown
    Academy (later a college), founded in 1789. See K. Mahoney,
    *Catholic Higher Education in Protestant America: The Jesuits and Harvard in the Age of the University* (Baltimore, 2003), 11.

[^63]: Codignola, "Holy See," 213, quotation from 196.

[^64]: A. Games, *The Web of Empire: English Cosmopolitanism in an Age of Expansion, 1560-1660* (New York, 2008), 9.

[^65]: Games, *Web*, 10.

[^66]: Games, *Web*, 224.

[^67]: Games, *Web*, 230; "scholar-chaplains" is 231.

[^68]: D.E. Mungello, *The Great Encounter of China and the West*
    (New York, 1999), 37.

[^69]: "Northampton was indeed remote, as far from Boston as Kansas City
    today"; "The way is long from Oxford to Northampton, as far as from
    the High Street to Main Street." P. Miller, *The New England Mind: From Colony to Province* (Cambridge, MA, 1953), 227.

[^70]: P. Miller, *The New England Mind: The Seventeenth Century*
    (Cambridge, MA, 1939), ix.

[^71]: Games, *Web*, 9-10.

[^72]: Games, *Web*, 9.

[^73]: Games, *Web*, 272.

[^74]: See for example Margaret Jacobs, *Strangers Nowhere in the World: The Rise of Cosmopolitanism in Early Modern Europe*
    (Philadelphia, 2006).

[^75]: Games, *Web*, 299.

[^76]: See for example S. Vertovec and R. Cohen, eds., *Conceiving Cosmopolitanism: Theory, Context, Practice* (Oxford, 2002).

[^77]: K. Appiah, *Cosmopolitanism: Ethics in a World of Strangers*
    (New York, 2006), xv.

[^78]: Appiah, *Cosmopolitanism*, 140.

[^79]: C. Kaplan, *Men of Letters in the Early Republic: Cultivating Forums of Citizenship* (Chapel Hill, 2008).

[^80]: Kaplan, *Men*, 68.

[^81]: Kaplan, *Men*, 2.

[^82]: Kaplan, *Men*, 67.

[^83]: Kaplan, *Men*, 200.

[^84]: L. Butler, *Critical Americans: Victorian Intellectuals and Transatlantic Liberal Reform* (Chapel Hill, 2007), pp. 168,
    170; C. Stansell, *American Moderns: Bohemian New York and the Creation of a New Century* (New York, 2000).
