---
title: Home
---

This site contains a set of published journal articles annotated by
their authors to highlight the use of digital methods to make historical
arguments. The goal is to provide models for those seeking to develop
argument-driven digital history, to encourage more of this form of
scholarship. Historical interpretations and arguments are not the only
ends that digital history should pursue, but they are *an* end that
digital history should pursue. Examining why there are so few examples
of digital history that make such explicit arguments, the authors of the
white paper "[Digital History and
Argument](https://rrchnm.org/wordpress/wp-content/uploads/2017/11/digital-history-and-argument.RRCHNM.pdf)"
(2017) concluded that scholars lack conceptual models of how to apply
digital methods to historical questions. The articles on this site are
annotated by their authors to serve as models of how to conceive and
construct interpretations and arguments using digital history methods
and materials for digital historians to emulate and build on.

The article text that appears on this site is not the published version,
which is not available without the permission of the publishers, but the
preprint text, the version first submitted by the author, before any
input from reviewers or editors for the journal. Some annotations
address the changes that authors made to their original submission to
address how reviewers and editors responded to their digital history
approaches and arguments.

This site is part of a project on digital history and argument led by
Lincoln Mullen and Stephen Robertson of the Roy Rosenzweig Center for
History and New Media, undertaken from 2017 to 2021, and generously
supported by the Andrew W. Mellon Foundation.

The articles by Leonardo Barleta and Rachel Midura, which both provide
interpretations based on network graphs and spatial visualizations,
appear in a special section of the Summer 2021 issue of the *Journal of
Social History*, volume 54, number 4. They were developed in a [series
of
workshops](https://rrchnm.org/news/workshop-digital-history-articles/)
to support authors in the process of writing, peer review and
publication held in 2019 and 2020, with the support of the Andrew W.
Mellon Foundation. The editors of the *Journal of Social History*, Matt
Karush and Sam Lebovic, co-convened the workshops with us and provided
the participants with invaluable insight into the publication and peer
review process. Leonardo Barleta, Genevieve Carpio and Andrzej
Rutkowski, Mariola Espinosa, Jacquelyne Howard, Rachel Midura, Erin
Sassin and Florence Feiereisen, Lauren Tilton, and Nathan Tye
participated in the workshops. We thank them all for their willingness
to take the time to share their work, and take on the challenge of
developing historical arguments.

We solicited annotations from authors of seven additional articles that
are influential examples of historical interpretations based on a
variety of digital methods: Caroline Winterer using spatial
visualizations; Ruth Ahnert and Sebastian Ahnert and Maeve Kane using
network graphs; and Melodee Beals, Sharon Block and David Newman, Jo
Guldi, and Tim Hitchcock and William Turkel using text analysis and
topic modeling. *These articles will appear on the site during summer
2021.*

A fuller discussion of the structures of argument used in published
digital history journal articles can be found in our introduction to the
*Journal of Social History* special section, "Arguing with Digital
History: Patterns of Historical Interpretation." The preprint version of
that introduction can be found on this site.

That discussion builds on the white paper "[Digital History and
Argument](https://rrchnm.org/argument-white-paper/)," which
provides an overview of the relationship between digital history and
historical arguments and how to create a bridge for digital historians
to contribute to historiographical conversations carried on in books and
articles. The white paper was co-authored by twenty-seven digital
humanities scholars who participated in a workshop convened in 2017 with
the support of the Andrew W. Mellon Foundation.

**Using the site:**

Annotations appear in the text in orange. Each annotation has a title.
Clicking on the triangle on the right of the annotation title bar will
open and close the box containing the annotation.

**Credits:**

Ken Albers

Dan Howlett
